###
article: "Advertisement
Supported by
‘Short Term’ Health Insurance? Up to 3 Years Under New Trump Policy
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration issued a final rule on Wednesday that clears the way for the sale of many more health insurance policies that do not comply with the Affordable Care Act and do not have to cover prescription drugs, maternity care or people with pre-existing conditions.
President Trump has said that he believes that the new “short-term, limited duration insurance” could help millions of people who do not want or need comprehensive health insurance providing the full range of benefits required by the health law.
The new plans will provide “much less expensive health care at a much lower price,” Mr. Trump said. The prices may be lower because the benefits will be fewer, and insurers do not have to cover pre-existing conditions or the people who have them.
Under the current rule, issued in late 2016 by the Obama administration, short-term insurance cannot last for more than three months, as it was meant to be a stopgap. Under the new rule, the limit would be 364 days, and insurers would be allowed, but not required, to extend policies. The maximum duration, including any extensions, would be 36 months.
The new options will help people struggling to afford coverage under the 2010 law, said James Parker, a senior adviser to Alex M. Azar II, the secretary of health and human services. But Mr. Parker added: “We make no representation that it’s equivalent coverage. These policies will not necessarily cover the same benefits or extend coverage to the same degree.”
The new rule is presented as a redefinition of “short-term, limited-duration insurance.” But it stretches the common understanding of those terms, and some of the new policies could be an attractive option for healthier consumers who now pay high prices for major medical coverage and are willing to take more risk in return for lower prices.
“Short-term is getting longer!” one insurance marketing company advised clients this week.
Democrats deride the new health plans as “junk insurance” and say consumers will discover the limits of such plans when they become sick.
Randy Pate, a senior official at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said the Trump administration expects 600,000 people to buy the new insurance policies next year, with enrollment increasing to 1.6 million by 2022.
The agency’s chief actuary, Paul Spitalnic, has estimated that premiums for short-term policies would be about half of the average premium for coverage sold in insurance exchanges under the Affordable Care Act, roughly $340 against $620 next year.
Consumer advocates, doctors, hospitals and some insurance companies expressed deep concern about the new plans, saying they would not adequately protect people who develop serious illnesses and could further destabilize insurance markets by drawing away healthy people.
People who buy the new policies and develop cancer could “face astronomical costs” and “may be forced to forgo treatment entirely because of costs,” said Chris Hansen, the president of the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network.
Stung by such criticism, Trump administration officials said they would require insurers to tell consumers exactly what is and what is not covered under the new policies.
“There are individuals today who have been priced out of coverage” because of the Affordable Care Act, Mr. Parker said. “Until we have a more comprehensive replacement for the Affordable Care Act and Obamacare, we are looking to do everything we can to take incremental steps that will make insurance coverage of any type more affordable to those who today cannot afford insurance coverage.”
The new rule takes effect in about two months. The new policies, which will be subject to state regulation, could be on sale before the end of the year. States can restrict their sale or require specific benefits, and some states have indicated that they intend to do so.
In another rule, issued only six weeks ago, the Trump administration made it easier for small businesses to band together to set up health plans that skirt many requirements of the Affordable Care Act.
Erika Sward, an assistant vice president of the American Lung Association, described the rule on short-term insurance as “one more blow of an ax to stable state marketplaces.”
In the past year, the Trump administration has also cut funds for groups that help people sign up for coverage; ended cost-sharing subsidies paid to insurers on behalf of low-income people; and asked a federal court to throw out parts of the Affordable Care Act, including the popular protections for people with pre-existing conditions.
Some insurers that lost money in the Affordable Care Act marketplace see the new short-term plans as a potentially lucrative opportunity.
The UnitedHealth Group has largely withdrawn from the Affordable Care Act marketplace, but is actively selling short-term medical plans through its Golden Rule Insurance Company.
On its website, UnitedHealth says that short-term plans are available for as little as $23.70 a month — for some unmarried women aged 19 to 24 who do not smoke. The plans have a $10,000 deductible, which is $2,650 more than the out-of-pocket costs allowed under a plan that complies with the Affordable Care Act.
A footnote on the website says, “Short-term health insurance is medically underwritten and does not cover pre-existing conditions.”
UnitedHealth supported the Trump administration’s move to extend the duration of short-term policies, saying this would “ensure that more consumers have consecutive months of coverage and fewer consumers experience coverage gaps during a year.”
Short-term plans were originally intended for people who were between jobs or needed temporary coverage for other reasons.
But Mary Dwight, a senior vice president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, said: “The new plans will no longer be just transition coverage. They will be an alternative to comprehensive insurance. They will split the market into plans for healthy people and plans for sick people.”
Advertisement"
econ_change of article is: none
###
article: "Before Congress left Washington for the year, Republicans finally made good on their determination to knock big holes in the Affordable Care Act, crippling its requirement that most Americans carry health insurance and leaving insurers without billions of dollars in promised federal payments.
At the same time, public support for the perennially controversial law has inched up to around its highest point in a half-dozen years. Nearly 9 million people so far have signed up for ACA health plans for 2018 during a foreshortened enrollment season, far surpassing expectations.
This dual reality puts the sprawling ACA — prized domestic legacy of the Obama era, whipping post of the Trump administration — at a new precipice, with its long-term fate hinging on the November midterm elections certain to consume Washington once the new year begins. If Democrats win a majority in either chamber of Congress, the law would be protected; a GOP sweep could further embolden repeal attempts.
“It’s right on the balance there,” said Robert J. Blendon, a Harvard professor of health policy and political analysis. “The viability of the program is heavily dependent on the outcome of the election, not the changes in between.”
With recent polls showing health care remains a top concern among voters, both major political parties have an incentive to wield it as an election issue. Democrats are likely to argue that the GOP wants to take coverage away from millions of Americans, with Republicans focusing on escalating insurance prices.
What happens in the interim, health policy analysts say, depends on how events play out in three arenas — Capitol Hill, the White House and the insurance industry.
After a year of full GOP control, congressional Republicans and the White House have damaged the ACA but fallen short of their vehement goal of dismantling broad swaths of it. More ambiguous is whether their end-of-year victory — removing tax penalties starting in 2019 for people who violate the insurance mandate — will whet the GOP’s appetite for taking apart more of the law.
“To those who believe — including Senate Republican leadership — that in 2018 there will not be another effort to repeal and replace Obamacare — well you are sadly mistaken,” Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.) tweeted last week.
Graham’s vow was a rejoinder to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.), who suggested in an NPR interview that “we’ll probably move on to other issues.” He also noted that the chamber’s slender GOP majority will shrink to one senator once the Democratic winner of a special election in Alabama is sworn in next month.
McConnell reiterated his intention to try to coax the Senate early in the year to adopt two measures, promised to a crucial Senate Republican moderate in exchange for her support of the massive tax overhaul enacted last week, that would help cushion ACA insurance marketplaces.
One bill would restore for two years the payments that the law guarantees insurers — estimated at $8 billion in 2018 — to reimburse them for discounts that ACA health plans must give lower-income customers for deductibles and other out-of-pocket expenses. President Trump cut off the payments in October.
The other bill would provide about $10 billion over two years to help states create high-risk pools or otherwise help insurers cope with customers with especially high medical costs. House conservatives fiercely opposed both measures.
Meanwhile, the administration is pressing forward with at least one more jab at the ACA marketplaces. As directed by an executive order that President Trump signed this fall, officials are finishing a draft rule to make it easier for insurers to sell meager but inexpensive health plans that skirt the law’s coverage requirements.
The ground-level effect of such changes for consumers rests in large part on how the insurance industry responds. Without the measure to help stabilize the law’s marketplaces and with greater availability of skimpy health plans, “we risk the individual market on the exchanges becoming a de facto high-risk pool,” said one industry official not authorized to speak on the record. That means premiums would soar, causing those exchanges to shrink and become the province of sick, expensive customers.
On the other hand, said Joseph Antos, a health-care scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, more expensive premiums could “move in the opposite direction of knocking down the ACA” because the law’s premium subsidies would rise to keep pace. For the more than 80 percent of ACA customers who qualify for those subsidies, he said, more generous subsidies could make it easier to afford higher tiers of coverage, motivating more people to sign up.
Such hard-to-predict boomerang effects could be true of the insurance mandate as well. The requirement has always been the least popular part of the law. So at a time when the most recent polls show that slightly more than half the public regards the ACA favorably, removing the most objectionable feature “could even be a blessing in disguise” for supporters, said Larry Levitt, senior vice president of the Kaiser Family Foundation.
Trump sought last week to equate the part of the tax legislation that undermines the individual mandate with repeal of the entire law. His assertion at a Cabinet meeting was a pronounced overstatement. Other central features of the ACA remain intact — including its insurance marketplaces, intended for Americans who do not have access to affordable health benefits through a job; the expansion of Medicaid in more than 30 states plus the District of Columbia; and the premium subsidies.
In fact, health-policy analysts say ending the penalties for violating the mandate will be a real-world test of a debate that has simmered for years: whether a legal requirement to be insured motivates people to get coverage, or whether the ACA’s subsidies are a stronger incentive.
According to the most recent federal figures, 6.7 million Americans who flouted the requirement paid a total of about $3 billion in tax penalties in 2015. Ending the penalties will cause an additional 4 million people to be uninsured in 2019 and 13 million within a decade, according to the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office. Insurance premiums in the ACA marketplaces will rise an extra 10 percent in most of those years, the CBO estimates.
If this happens, it will feed the talking points of both political parties, Blendon, the Harvard professor, predicts. “The big-picture issues will be premiums increasing and dropping coverage,” he said.
But for now, Antos says, the unexpectedly high number of people enrolling in ACA plans, in a year when insurance choices shrank, premium costs rose and the White House became a megaphone for criticism of the law, suggests that the law remains “durable.”
“I don’t see big lurches in either direction for both political and practical reasons,” he added. “It’s hard to move the ship once it’s moving.”
Read more:
Americans sprint to get Affordable Care Act coverage in last hours before deadline
Fifth year’s ACA enrollment season opening with daunting obstacles"
econ_change of article is: none
###
article: "Enrollment in the insurance exchanges for President Obama’s signature health-care law is at less than half the initial forecast, pushing several major insurance companies to stop offering health plans in certain markets because of significant financial losses.
As a result, the administration’s promise of a menu of health-plan choices has been replaced by a grim, though preliminary, forecast: Next year, more than 1 in 4 counties are at risk of having a single insurer on its exchange, said Cynthia Cox, who studies health reform for the Kaiser Family Foundation.
Debate over how perilous the predicament is for the Affordable Care Act, commonly called Obamacare, is nearly as partisan as the divide over the law itself. But at the root of the problem is this: The success of the law depends fundamentally on the exchanges being profitable for insurers — and that requires more people to sign up.
In February 2013, the Congressional Budget Office predicted that 24 million people would buy health coverage through the federally and state-operated online exchanges by this year. Just 11.1 million people were signed up as of late March.
Exchanges are marketplaces where people who do not receive health benefits through a job can buy private insurance, often with government subsidies.
“Enrollment is key, first and foremost,” said Sara R. Collins, a vice president at the Commonwealth Fund, a nonpartisan foundation that funds health-care research. “They have to have this critical mass of people so that, by the law of averages, you’re going to get a mix of healthy and less healthy people.”
A big reason the CBO projections were so far off is that the agency overestimated how many people would lose insurance through their employers, which would force them into the exchanges. But there have been challenges getting the uninsured to sign up, too.
The law requires every American to get health coverage or pay a penalty, but the penalty hasn’t been high enough to persuade many Americans to buy into the health plans. Even those who qualify for subsidized premiums sometimes balk at the high deductibles on some plans.
And people who do outreach to the uninsured say the enrollment process itself has been more complex and confusing than Obama’s initial comparison to buying a plane ticket.
“This exchange will allow you to one-stop shop for a health-care plan, compare benefits and prices, and choose a plan that’s best for you and your family,” Obama said in a speech in 2009. “You will have your choice of a number of plans that offer a few different packages, but every plan would offer an affordable, basic package.”
In some markets, a shortfall in enrollment is testing insurers’ ability to balance the medical claims they pay out with income from premiums. In an announcement curtailing its involvement in the exchanges this month, Aetna cited financial losses traced to too many sick people signing up for care and not enough healthy ones.
The health-care law has been a political lightning rod from the beginning, and Republican legislators have used insurance companies’ withdrawals from the exchanges to reignite calls for the law’s repeal.
Kaiser tracks public data on insurer participation in the exchanges to project how many options counties will have, but the numbers are not final. This year, exchanges in about 7 percent of counties had just one insurer. Earlier this month, Aetna announced that it will pull out of 11 of the 15 states where it offers coverage on the health-care exchanges. Humana made a similar decision weeks earlier, planning to exit several states. And last spring, UnitedHealth Group said it would remain in three or fewer exchanges next year.
Obama has used the health-care law’s challenges to issue a new call for a public insurance option.
“Congress should revisit a public plan to compete alongside private insurers in areas of the country where competition is limited,” he wrote in an essay published in the Journal of the American Medical Association. “Adding a public plan in such areas would strengthen the Marketplace approach, giving consumers more affordable options while also creating savings for the federal government.”
Chicago resident Eva Saur, 32, is exactly the kind of healthy person insurers would like to have on their rolls. Saur hasn’t had coverage in nearly a decade, but she takes good care of her health. For the handful of times she’s been sick, a walk-in clinic at a pharmacy has been sufficient.
“I was raised — not against the system — but we had a doctor who would prescribe us herbs before a prescription” medication, Saur said. “For me, monetarily, it makes way more sense to do this.”
Saur’s tax penalty for being uninsured was a bit more than $600 last year, while the cheapest health plan she examined cost about as much for three months in premiums — and came with a $7,000 deductible.
The penalty for not signing up is increasing. Still, some policy experts insist it is not enough motivation to buy insurance.
“It was basically no stick at all. This is the classic case of where Johnny marked crayon on the wall, his mother said, ‘Don’t do that,’ and then slapped his hand a day later,” said Joseph Antos, a resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute. “The connection between the offense and the penalty is a little remote.”
The health-care law has had unequivocal successes. In some areas, lots of insurers compete on the exchanges, which helps keep premiums low. In Cleveland and Los Angeles, the average premium for a benchmark health plan actually declined in 2016. The number of uninsured Americans continues to shrink, hitting 9.1 percent last year — the lowest level ever.
The average premium for the people who receive tax credits – 85 percent of the people signed up through the exchanges — is just $106 per month. People who qualify for the income-based tax credits are largely sheltered from premium increases.
The first people to sign up for insurance through the exchanges were expected to be those with chronic diseases and high medical costs. Because insurers could no longer discriminate against those people, the law built in three mechanisms for the government to redistribute money from plans with healthier patients to those with sicker ones. Two of those programs expire at the end of the year. The third, called the “risk adjustment” program, transferred $4.6 billion between insurers in 2014.
Critics say there’s a fundamental problem with the system, and the risk-adjustment program needs to be fixed. But supporters of the law argue that the problem is temporary, the natural evolution of a nascent free-market system. Some of the first companies to enter the market made bad bets on how healthy customers would be, resulting in unprofitable health plans. Proponents say it’s natural for new entrants to replace them, with better information and more competitive plans.
Cigna, for example, has said it has filed to enter exchanges in three new states next year.
“There’s no bottleneck, this is just the natural growth pains of a new market,” said Jonathan Gruber, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. “What happened is they set up this new market where insurers didn’t have experience; insurers made an estimate as to what people would cost and their estimate turned out to be too low.”
Supporters point to a recent government analysis that suggests the “risk pool” — the number of high-cost sick customers relative to healthy ones — is not worsening and could even be improving. Medical costs per enrollee in the marketplaces fell by 0.1 percent in 2015, while medical costs for people in the broader health-insurance market grew by at least 3 percent. In states with strong enrollment growth, there were greater reductions in members’ costs.
Everyone agrees that more healthy people need to sign up.
In June, the Obama administration unveiled its plan to target younger and healthier adults, including direct outreach to individuals and families who paid the penalty. It also released new guidance, encouraging insurance companies to communicate more with young adults being kicked off their family’s plan when they turn 26 years old.
Even older adults are taking their chances without health-care coverage.
Donte Fitzhugh, 55, of Charlotte was laid off last year from a job as a call-center operations manager. COBRA, which allows former workers to extend their employer-provided health insurance if they pay the full premium, was expensive, and Fitzhugh didn’t sign up for the exchanges for very human reasons: He figured he’d find a job faster than he did. He thought every penny counted when he was unemployed. He didn’t have major health problems, and he got a coupon to help cover the costs of his hypertension medicine.
As the window to sign up for health insurance passed without a new job, he kept procrastinating. Although health insurance from a new job will begin in October, he faces a penalty that will cost him hundreds of dollars.
“I believe in Obamacare. As an American, it’s my responsibility to have health insurance,” Fitzhugh said. “Since I didn’t have it, it’s going to impact me financially.”
Such are the barriers to insurance: Remaining uninsured can be more attractive or just easier than signing up to pay hundreds of dollars a month for something that many people don’t think they need.
Judy Robinson, a health insurance support specialist at the Charlottesville Free Clinic, has counseled hundreds of patients who are eligible for subsidized insurance on the exchanges but ultimately decide not to sign up. She said the subsidized insurance on the marketplace tends to be a good deal for those who make between 100 and 150 percent of the poverty level. But those who make more often are faced with large deductibles that don’t seem like a good deal to many people.
Beyond the sticker price, she said it can require a lot of paperwork to demonstrate the annual income required to qualify for tax credits if people are juggling multiple part-time jobs. And sometimes, people are simply mistrustful.
“There’s a lot of people that live sort of off the grid, sort of semi-off the grid and they just don’t go to the doctor,” Robinson said. “The hospital is the place where you go to die, and doctors are just going to try and make you do procedures and get money out of you. That’s how they think.”
There are also those who want insurance but are struggling — and find themselves trapped by the high cost of health care.
Donna Privigyi, 49, of Charlottesville has looked into insurance through the exchanges a few times. But over the past few years, much of her modest child-care salary and effort went toward trying to help support her adult son, Mark, who hadn’t been the same since the death of his younger brother. Donna was focused on trying to support her son. Health insurance — even rent — was an afterthought.
“With supporting my son, it didn’t matter,” Privigyi said. “I was just like, I can barely get by, just juggling the bills and taking care of him.”
Late last year, Mark died of a drug overdose, and Privigyi — consumed by grief — wasn’t thinking about insurance when the window to sign up opened and closed.
Then, in June, she got appendicitis. Her bills from two hospitals were $33,000.
The argument for having health insurance is the pile of bills she has been collecting — now with late fees added. The obstacle to getting health insurance is that same stack of bills.
“It’s such a gamble, you know, until I figure out what to do with these medical bills,” Privigyi said. “They’re just adding on late fees. How can I even afford to sign up?”
Juliet Eilperin contributed to this report.
2013 estimate of how many people would buy coverage through federally and state-operated online exchanges by this year.
Actual number of people who signed up by the end of the last enrollment period in January."
econ_change of article is: none
###
article: "President Trump is throwing a bomb into the insurance marketplaces created under the Affordable Care Act, choosing to end critical payments to health insurers that help millions of lower-income Americans afford coverage. The decision follows an executive order on Thursday to allow alternative health plans that skirt the law’s requirements.
The White House confirmed late Thursday that it would halt federal payments for cost-sharing reductions, although a statement did not specify when. According to two people briefed on the decision, the cutoff will be as of November. The subsidies total about $7 billion this year.
Trump has threatened for months to stop the payments, which help eligible consumers afford their deductibles and other out-of-pocket expenses, but held off while other administration officials warned him that such a move would cause an implosion of the ACA marketplaces that could be blamed on Republicans.
Health insurers and state regulators have been in a state of high anxiety over the prospect of the marketplaces cratering because of such White House action. The fifth year’s open-enrollment season for consumers to buy coverage through ACA exchanges will open in less than three weeks, and insurers have said that stopping the cost-sharing payments would be the single greatest step the Trump administration could take to harm the marketplaces — and the law.
Ending the payments is grounds for any insurer to back out of its federal contract to sell health plans for 2018.
The cost-sharing reductions have long been the subject of a political and legal seesaw. Congressional Republicans argued that the sprawling 2010 health-care law that established the subsidies does not include specific language providing appropriations to cover the government’s cost. House Republicans sued HHS over the payments during President Barack Obama’s second term. A federal court agreed that they were illegal, and the case has been pending before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit.
“The bailout of insurance companies through these unlawful payments is yet another example of how the previous administration abused taxpayer dollars and skirted the law to prop up a broken system,” a statement from the White House said. “Congress needs to repeal and replace the disastrous Obamacare law and provide real relief to the American people.”
For months, administration officials have debated privately about what to do. The president has consistently pushed to cut them off, according to officials and advisers who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss private conversations. Some top health officials within the administration, including former Health and Human Services secretary Tom Price, cautioned that this could exacerbate already escalating premiums on the ACA market, these Republicans said.
But some government lawyers also argued that the payments were not authorized under the existing law, according to one administration official, and would be difficult to keep defending in court.
While the administration will now argue that Congress should appropriate the funds if it wants them to continue, such a proposal will face a serious hurdle on Capitol Hill. In a recent interview, Rep. Tom Cole (R-Okla.), who chairs the House Appropriations Subcommittee overseeing HHS, said it would be difficult to muster support for such a move among House conservatives.
One person familiar with the president’s decision said that HHS officials and Trump’s domestic policy advisers had urged him to continue the payments at least through the end of the year.
The cost-sharing payments are separate from a different subsidy that provides federal assistance on premiums to more than four-fifths of the 10 million Americans with ACA coverage.
Word of the president’s decision, which was first reported by Politico, came just hours after he signed the executive order intended to circumvent the ACA by making it easier for individuals and small businesses to buy alternative types of health insurance with lower prices, fewer benefits and weaker government protections.
The White House and allies portrayed the president’s move as wielding administrative powers to accomplish what congressional Republicans have failed to achieve: fostering more coverage choices while tearing down the law’s insurance marketplaces. Until the White House's announcement late Thursday, the executive order represented Trump’s biggest step to date to reverse the health-care policies of the Obama administration, a central promise since last year’s presidential campaign.
Critics, who include state insurance commissioners, most of the health-insurance industry and mainstream policy specialists, predict that a proliferation of these other kinds of coverage will have damaging ripple effects, driving up costs for consumers with serious medical conditions and prompting more insurers to flee the law’s marketplaces. Part of Trump’s action, they say, will spark court challenges over its legality.
The most far-reaching element of the order instructs a trio of Cabinet departments to rewrite federal rules for “association health plans” — a form of insurance in which small businesses of a similar type band together through an association to negotiate health benefits. These plans have had to meet coverage requirements and consumer protections under the 2010 health-care law, but the administration is likely to exempt them from those rules and let such plans be sold from state to state without insurance licenses in each one.
In addition, the order is designed to expand the availability of short-term insurance policies, which offer limited benefits as a bridge for people between jobs or young adults no longer eligible for their parents’ health plans. The Obama administration ruled that short-term insurance may not last for more than three months; Trump wants to extend that to nearly a year.
Trump’s action also is intended to widen employers’ ability to use pretax dollars in “health reimbursement arrangements” to help workers pay for any medical expenses, not just for health policies that meet ACA rules — another reversal of Obama policy.
In a late-morning signing ceremony in the White House’s Roosevelt Room, surrounded by supportive small-business owners, Cabinet members and a few Republicans from Capitol Hill, the president spoke in his characteristic superlatives about the effects of his action and what he called “the Obamacare nightmare.”
Trump said that Thursday’s move, which will trigger months of regulatory work by federal agencies, “is only the beginning.” He promised “even more relief and more freedom” from ACA rules. And although leading GOP lawmakers are eager to move on from their unsuccessful attempts this year to abolish central facets of the 2010 law, Trump said that “we are going to pressure Congress very strongly to finish the repeal and replace of Obamacare.”
The executive order will fulfill a quest by conservative Republican lawmakers, especially in the House, who have tried for more than two decades to expand the availability of association health plans by allowing them to be sold, unregulated, across state lines. On the other hand, Trump’s approach conflicts with what he and GOP leaders in Congress have held out as a main health-policy goal — giving each state more discretion over matters of insurance.
Health policy experts in think tanks, academia and the health-care industry pointed out that the order’s language is fairly broad, so the ensuing fine print in agencies’ rules will determine whether the impact will be as sweeping or quick as Trump boasted — his directive will provide “millions of people with Obamacare relief,” he said.
Significant questions that remain include whether individuals will be able to join associations, a point that could raise legal issues; whether the administration will start to let association health plans count toward the ACA’s requirement that most Americans carry insurance; and whether such plans can charge higher prices to small businesses with sicker workers — or refuse to insure them.
The president issued the directive less than three weeks before the Nov. 1 start of the fifth open-enrollment season in ACA marketplaces for people who do not have access to affordable health benefits through a job. Trump noted that about half of the nation’s counties will have just one insurer in their exchange, and he claimed that “many will have none.” However, the most recent canvass shows that there will be no “bare” counties in 2018.
A senior administration official, speaking to reporters on the condition of anonymity shortly before Trump signed the order, said that the policy changes it sets in motion will require agencies to follow customary procedures to write new rules and solicit public comment. That means new insurance options will not be available in time for coverage beginning in January, he said.
Even so, with a shortened sign-up period and large cuts in federal funds for advertising and enrollment help already hobbling the marketplaces, “if there’s a lot of hoopla around new options that may be available soon, it could be one more thing that discourages enrollment,” said Larry Levitt, the Kaiser Family Foundation’s senior vice president.
Other aspects of the executive order include commissioning a six-month study, to be led by federal health officials, of ways to limit consolidation within the insurance and hospital industries. Trump also directed agencies to find additional means to increase competition and choice in health care to improve its quality and lower its cost.
The order produced predictable reactions in Congress, with Republican leaders praising the move and Democrats accusing the White House of sabotaging the law.
Among policy experts, critics warned that young and healthy people who use relatively little insurance will gravitate to association health plans because of their lower price tags. That would concentrate older and sicker customers in ACA marketplaces with spiking rates.
Mike Consedine, chief executive of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) said Thursday that the group has long opposed such plans and is concerned that the administration will allow ones that can bypass state licenses and have such weak financial underpinnings that some will collapse, leaving customers stranded and state insurance regulators “picking up the pieces.”
[As ACA enrollment nears, administration keeps cutting federal support of the law]
Short-term health insurance makes up a tiny fraction of the policies sold, with fewer than 30 companies covering only about 160,000 people nationwide at the end of last year, according to NAIC data.
Experts could not point to figures for how many association health plans exist or how many people they insure. Such arrangements have existed for decades, and scandals have on occasion exposed “multi-employer welfare arrangements” started by unscrupulous operators who took members’ money and either did not have enough reserves to cover hospital bills or absconded with premiums.
The National Federation of Independent Business, a small-business lobby, has pressed Congress to allow use of association plans, arguing that they can be less expensive and give workers more insurance choices. Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) has promoted the idea, and he stood just behind Trump at the morning ceremony. After nearly walking out of the room without signing the order, the president returned to affix his signature to the document and then hand Paul the pen.
Selling health plans from state to state without separate licenses — the idea underlying much of the president’s order — has long been a Republican mantra. It has gained little traction in practice, however.
Half a dozen states — before the ACA was passed in 2010 as well as since then — have passed laws permitting insurers to sell health policies approved by other states. And since last year, the ACA has allowed “compacts” in which groups of states can agree that health plans licensed in any of them could be sold in the others. Under such compacts, federal health officials must make sure the plans offer at least the same benefits and are as affordable as those sold in the ACA marketplaces.
As of this summer, “no state was known to actually offer or sell such policies,” according to a report by the National Conference of State Legislatures. A main reason, experts say, is insurers’ difficulty in arranging networks of doctors and other providers of care far from their home states."
econ_change of article is: none
###
article: "Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) released a new proposal to overhaul the Affordable Care Act on Thursday after spending three weeks reworking it to win over wavering lawmakers on the right and in the center.
But within hours, it was clear that Senate leaders still didn’t have the votes to fulfill their long-standing quest to replace former president Barack Obama’s 2010 health-care law.
The new draft would lift many of the ACA’s regulatory requirements, allowing insurers to offer bare-bones policies without coverage for services such as preventive or mental health care. It would also direct billions of dollars to help lower- and middle-income Americans buy plans on the private market.
However, the draft leaves in place deep proposed cuts to Medicaid — and at least three Republicans quickly stated that they remain opposed, casting doubt on McConnell’s plans to pass the bill next week.
“This is not what the American people expect of us, and it’s not what they deserve,” said Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.), one of the three senators who said they oppose McConnell’s new bill.
The GOP’s continuing push — and continuing struggle — to make good on a campaign promise it began invoking seven years ago to “repeal and replace” Obamacare reflected the peril Republicans face whether they pass a bill or not.
On the one hand, the ACA has provided medical coverage for millions of Americans — and has grown more popular as a result. Moderate Republicans remained concerned Thursday that the new proposal would make insurance unaffordable for some middle-income Americans and throw millions off the rolls of Medicaid, the public insurance for disabled and low-income Americans.
Yet conservatives continued to push for a more wholesale rollback of the ACA — highlighting the danger for all Republicans of failing to achieve a promise most of them made on the campaign trail.
“The new Senate health care bill is substantially different from the version released last month, and it is unclear to me whether it has improved,” Sen. Mike Lee (R-Utah), a conservative who has pushed for a full Obamacare repeal, said in a statement. “I will need time to study the new version and speak with experts about whether it does enough to lower health insurance premiums for middle class families.”
Looming even larger was the reality that Republicans, despite their control of both chambers of Congress and with President Trump in the White House, have made little progress on an ambitious agenda that McConnell had hoped to move on to next week after a vote on the health-care bill. Among their goals are major tax legislation, raising the debt ceiling and passing a defense authorization bill.
Republican leaders seemed to acknowledge Thursday the difficult path ahead, with several speaking privately about internal divisions on how to pass the bill — and to prevent further defections.
“We will have the votes when we start voting,” said Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn (R-Tex.).
McConnell’s new draft was the result of weeks of negotiations with conservatives and moderates. For those on the right, the plan incorporated a proposal from Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) allowing insurers to offer minimalist policies as long as they offer more-comprehensive ones as well. Cruz said the provision would give consumers greater choice and lower-cost premiums.
For those in the center, the new proposal would spend an additional $70 billion offsetting consumers’ costs and $45 billion to treat opioid addiction.
Republicans financed these changes by keeping a trio of Obamacare taxes targeting high-earners — a 3.8 percent tax on net investment income and a 0.9 percent Medicare payroll tax on individuals making $200,000 a year or couples earning $250,000, along with a tax on insurers with high-paid executives. Lawmakers such as Sen. Bob Corker (R-Tenn.) said repealing those taxes would give too much relief to the wealthy at the expense of the poor.
The new measure has won Cruz’s backing, but Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.), another conservative who said the measure still does not do enough to unravel Obamacare, remained opposed to voting on the bill, as did two centrists, McCain and Sen. Susan Collins (R-Maine).
“My strong intention and current inclination is to vote no on the motion to proceed,” Collins told reporters, referring to the procedural vote required before the legislation can reach the Senate floor. Collins added that she hopes Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) will be willing to work with Republicans to fix the legislation. “I have had numerous Democrats come to me and say they want to work with us on the bill,” she said. “I’m going to take them at their word.”
Even as McConnell negotiated with individual members, the outlook for the bill was complicated when Sens. Bill Cassidy (R-La.) and Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.) debuted an alternative proposal.
In a joint interview with CNN on Thursday, Cassidy and Graham said they would take the billions of dollars the federal government now receives in taxes under the ACA and direct that revenue to the states.
The plan did not appear to be gaining traction — Graham said he would vote to start debate on McConnell’s bill — but its introduction underscored the extent to which a growing number of GOP senators have started looking beyond the current effort, with diminishing confidence that it will prevail.
“I don’t see this as the end if this bill were not to pass,” Collins said. “I see it as the beginning of the kind of process that I would have liked to have seen in the first place.”
The surprise announcement from Graham and Cassidy came just before Senate GOP leaders released their revised health-care proposal.
The McConnell plan would allow Americans to pay for premiums with money from tax-exempt health savings accounts, an idea that many conservatives have pushed for — a tax break that primarily would benefit the upper middle class.
The plan’s proposed rollback of Medicaid expansion under the ACA, as well as a proposal to slow the overall growth of the program starting in 2025, gave a number of Republican moderates pause Thursday.
Sen. Rob Portman (R-Ohio), who came out against the original draft of the bill, said he was not yet willing to vote yes to move the bill to the floor. “I’m in the same position I’ve been in, looking at the language and looking forward to the analysis,” he said.
Cassidy and Sen. John Hoeven (R-N.D.) said they need to see the Congressional Budget Office score, due next week, before making a decision.
“We are going to look at it, read it, understand it and see the CBO score,” Hoeven told reporters. He said that he was encouraged by changes intended to help lower-income Americans but that, “at this point, I’m reserving judgment.”
In a sign of the challenge McConnell still faces to round up votes, he huddled Thursday afternoon in his office with Portman and Sens. Shelley Moore Capito (R-W.Va.), Dean Heller (R-Nev.) and Lisa Murkowski (R-Alaska). Those lawmakers hail from states that have extended Medicaid under the current law to cover able-bodied, childless adults. Capito, who opposed the earlier bill, said in a statement she still has “serious concerns” about the revised draft.
With Vice President Pence prepared to cast a tiebreaking vote and no Democrats expected to support the bill, Republicans need the support of 50 of their 52 members to pass the legislation.
Senate leaders and Trump officials are aware that moderate Republican holdouts may be the bill’s biggest threat.
Seema Verma, administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, made a presentation to a group of Republican senators from Medicaid-expansion states Thursday afternoon. She promised to do everything possible to minimize the number of uninsured, by giving states maximum flexibility in how they could use some of the money from the bill’s $182 billion state stabilization fund.
Nearly 15 million Americans would lose their Medicaid coverage by 2026 under the Senate bill, according to the CBO. Verma sought to minimize that outlook, saying states could use the stabilization funding to heavily subsidize private coverage for these Americans — even though the size of the fund does not come close to the bill’s $772 billion in cuts to the program over the next decade.
Cruz said the new bill was a “substantial improvement” over the first version and argued that a focus on reducing premiums was the best way to unite fractured Republicans. He touted his proposal as means of accomplishing both.
“It’s not what the federal government mandates you have to buy — it’s your choice what health insurance is the best for you and your family,” Cruz said.
Critics, including insurers, say that providing the option of skimpier plans would draw younger, healthier consumers into a separate risk pool. That development would drive up rates for the Americans buying more-comprehensive coverage on the individual market, which could in turn destabilize the entire market.
The revised bill would establish a $70 billion fund to subsidize insurers providing both kinds of plans “for the associated costs of covering high-risk individuals,” according to a GOP summary of the bill. It would also allow individuals buying catastrophic plans to get a federal tax credit if they would be otherwise eligible, which is now barred under current law.
Larry Levitt, senior vice president for special initiatives at the Kaiser Family Foundation, said in an interview that “healthy people could end up with much lower premiums,” on the private insurance market, though the proposal’s regulatory changes could upend coverage for those with costly medical conditions.
“There are many provisions in this bill that destabilize the individual insurance,” he said. “Then it attempts to restabilize it by funneling an enormous amount of money to insurers.”
The Senate bill also includes a limited exemption for members of Congress, which Republicans said was due to procedural limitations in Senate budget rules. Cruz introduced a measure to strike the exemption Thursday afternoon, saying in a statement, “While this exemption was included in the Senate health care bill out of procedural necessity, we must still be diligent in ensuring that Members of Congress are treated just like other Americans under this law.”
Senate leaders are leaving themselves the option of jettisoning the Cruz proposal after they get the nonpartisan CBO score, which will gauge the Cruz amendment’s impact on the budget and the overall number of uninsured.
Cornyn said Thursday that he expects the CBO will release two scores for the bill but would not confirm what those scores would include or when they will be released.
“We are expecting a CBO score, but I can’t tell you exactly what the format will be,” Cornyn told reporters, adding that the Cruz amendment would be scored.
Paige Winfield Cunningham and David Weigel contributed to this report."
econ_change of article is: none
###
article: "If you’re among the nearly one-third of U.S. taxpayers who can’t get their calls answered by the nation’s tax collector, reports of improved assistance by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) won’t mean much.
But when the agency’s 70 percent telephone answer rate for this filing season is compared to its 38 percent rate for the last fiscal year, mediocre starts to look good.
“The IRS is continuing to struggle to deliver for the American taxpayer,” Tony Reardon, president of the National Treasury Employees Union (NTEU), told reporters Thursday. “I think that there’s no question but that the IRS needs more resources and they need more personnel to meet the demand for taxpayer services, to catch tax cheats and criminals, to effectively fight identity fraud, to enforce tax laws and to collect all the taxes that are owed.”
Reardon, who represents IRS employees, called the telephone news conference to continue the union’s long fight for adequate agency funding. Budget cuts so devastated the ability of the IRS to help taxpayers that “service” didn’t rightly fit in the agency’s name.
When more than six of 10 taxpayers were not getting their calls answered last year, it marked a stark drop in service for the agency people love to hate even in the best of times. The high point in recent years was 87 percent in 2004, and at no time since then has the percentage of answered calls fallen below 50 percent — until 2015.
This year’s dramatic improvement has been fueled by temporary hires. When they go, the relatively good performance will too. IRS Commissioner John Koskinen expects the portion of callers who get telephone service will be just 47 percent for all of 2016.
“Even that’s much better than last year, but we want everybody to understand that it’s still not where we want it to be,” he told the National Press Club two weeks ago. “If we received the president’s fiscal 2017 budget request, our phone level of service would be up to 75 percent next year for the entire year.”
The IRS suffered a 21 percent staffing cut, amounting to almost 23,000 full- and part-time employees, from 2011 to 2016, according to NTEU. It released changes in IRS staffing state by state.
Yet, as the number of staffers fell, the workload grew.
An IRS statement said its budget is “more than $900 million below 2010 levels despite handling more than 10 million additional tax returns a year and gaining major legislative programs since then.”
It shouldn’t be such a struggle, especially for an agency that more than pays for itself. If fact, it funds more than 90 percent of the federal government, while generating a return on investment that would make Wall Street salivate.
“So it costs the IRS about 35 cents to collect $100,” Koskinen said. “Now, if Congress were to give us the $1 billion increase requested in the president’s budget proposal for fiscal year 2017, that means we’d be able to do more. If Congress were to fund the president’s budget, we estimate that the enforcement improvements we have planned would yield $64 billion over the 10-year budget window that’s commonly used. That would average out to about $6 billion a year. Keep in mind, I’m not talking about new taxes. This is money that’s already owed but not collected due to our staffing shortages.”
Those figures, however, pale in comparison to the huge tax gap between what is owed and what is paid on time. A Government Accountability Office report released Tuesday said implementing its recommendations to IRS “is a key step in reducing the $385 billion net tax gap, as well as in strengthening tax administration and service to taxpayers.”
Of course, the IRS would be better able to implement the recommendations with increased funding.
“We’ve been saying this for years,” Reardon said. “It’s time for Congress to pay attention to these warnings and give the IRS the resources it needs to better serve the American people.”
Read more:
[Weak IRS controls leave taxpayer data vulnerable, report says]
[The IRS has improved but still provides bad customer service]
[Watch out for tax scammers who have more time to take your money]"
econ_change of article is: none
###
article: "WASHINGTON — The Senate moved closer to approving a sweeping overhaul of the tax code on Wednesday, voting to begin debate on the tax bill as Republican leaders continue trying to secure the votes for final passage.
The procedural vote, which passed 52 to 48 along party lines, put the Senate on track for a final vote later this week.
The push by Senate Republicans to pass an ambitious tax overhaul now enters a critical and politically delicate phase. Republican leaders still lack firm commitments from enough of their members to ensure passage later in the week, and significant changes were still being discussed on Wednesday.
Among the biggest potential changes would involve nudging the corporate tax rate from the proposed 20 percent rate to 22 percent. Such a move would still result in a large cut from the current top rate of 35 percent, but would give lawmakers some additional money to use for other concessions to help win over reticent lawmakers.
The higher rate was floated on Wednesday by two Republican senators, Marco Rubio of Florida and Mike Lee of Utah, who want to use the money from a higher corporate rate to pay for an expanded child tax credit.Continue reading the main story
“It makes us just as competitive, but it allows us to do the pro-worker reform that we desperately need,” Mr. Rubio said.
Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, expressed openness to a slightly higher corporate rate than the Senate had proposed.
“Failure is not an option,” Mr. Graham said when asked about raising the corporate tax rate to pay for other changes. “If you’ve got to go up a point or two to make it work, I’m fine with it.”
But the White House was not receptive.
“We do support the child tax credit,” said Raj Shah, a White House spokesman. “We also think that it’s important to make businesses more competitive. We would not support raising the corporate rate as outlined in that amendment.”
In a significant concession, Republicans were planning to sweeten the tax treatment for so-called pass-through businesses by boosting a tax deduction for owners of those businesses.
But an additional sticking point emerged in the form of how to guard against ballooning budget deficits, with Republicans discussing whether automatic spending cuts could be put in place to ensure that deficits do not soar if the expected economic growth doesn’t materialize.
As negotiations among Republicans continued, Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, the top Democrat on the Finance Committee, complained that lawmakers did not know what exactly they would be debating.
“There are rumors; there are whispers,” he said shortly before the procedural vote, adding that the bill “seems to have changed practically every half-hour.”
As Republicans negotiate, they are encumbered by parliamentary rules that limit what provisions can be included in the bill. Another restriction: the final bill cannot cost more than $1.5 trillion over 10 years.
The measure’s prospects have nonetheless seemed on the ascent, as reluctant senators speak more positively about the overhaul.
Senate Republicans are using the same procedures to move the tax overhaul through the chamber as they used this summer to try to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act. In that effort, Republicans succeeded in voting to start debate, just as they did on Wednesday, but they could not ultimately muster the votes to approve a repeal bill.
To pass a tax bill in the Senate, Republicans will need the support of 50 of their 52 members, assuming no Democrats vote for the bill and Vice President Mike Pence breaks a 50-50 tie. The House already passed a tax package that differs substantially from the Senate’s version, so if the Senate can succeed in passing its bill, the two chambers would then need to reconcile the two plans.
But big changes could still be made to the Senate package in the next day or two. The Senate’s debate on the tax overhaul is limited to 20 hours, to be followed by a marathon series of amendment votes known as a vote-a-rama.
Two Republican senators, Ron Johnson of Wisconsin and Steve Daines of Montana, have been unhappy with how the Senate plan treats so-called pass-through businesses, whose profits are distributed to their owners and taxed at individual income tax rates.
The current Senate plan allows pass-through owners to deduct 17.4 percent of business income as a way of lowering their tax rates. But Republicans now plan to boost the deduction to 20 percent, people familiar with the matter said.
Before Wednesday’s vote, Mr. Daines said that he had “seen enough progress to vote yes to move the debate forward,” alluding to the larger deduction.
“There has been some good progress for Main Street businesses in the tax cut bill,” he wrote. “I was able to secure more than $60 billion in tax cuts for Main Street businesses.”
Then there are Republican senators with concerns about ballooning the national debt, which has topped $20 trillion, a group that includes Bob Corker of Tennessee, Jeff Flake of Arizona and James Lankford of Oklahoma.
Mr. Corker said Tuesday that he had received a commitment for some kind of mechanism to be added to the bill that would raise certain taxes if projected economic growth falls short of expectations. And Mr. Lankford cited the trigger provision as he voiced support for the tax overhaul on Wednesday.
But the mechanics of such a “trigger” have not been laid out in detail, and some Republican lawmakers have reacted coolly to the proposal. Conservative groups like the Club for Growth and Americans for Tax Reform adamantly oppose the idea, saying it would undercut the economic growth by injecting uncertainty into the tax system.
“Any senator who understands basic business principles and truly cares about the deficit should understand that this trigger is an automatic tax increase and will actually harm economic growth,” said David McIntosh, the president of the Club for Growth.
An alternative approach would be to impose automatic spending cuts in the event that economic growth falls short of projections. Mr. Graham said that some of his colleagues saw cuts to nonmilitary programs as preferable to rolling back the tax cuts if they do not bring sufficient economic growth. He said that Republicans were divided on the idea of a trigger and what it would affect.
Senator John Kennedy, Republican of Louisiana, said he opposes the concept of a trigger, but prefers one that cuts spending to one that increases taxes. Senator Bill Cassidy, the other Louisiana Republican, also appeared fond of the idea of using spending cuts as a safeguard in the bill.
“It’s intriguing, isn’t it?” he said.Continue reading the main story"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "Several senior White House officials have begun discussing whether to push for a temporary payroll tax cut as a way to arrest an economic slowdown, three people familiar with the discussions said, revealing growing concerns about the economy among President Trump’s top economic aides.
The talks are still in their early stages and have included a range of other tax breaks. The officials also have not decided whether to formally push Congress to approve any of these measures, these people said, speaking on condition of anonymity because they weren’t authorized to disclose internal discussions. But the White House in recent days has begun searching for proposals that could halt a slowing economy.
Even though the discussions within the White House had begun, the White House released a statement disputing that the payroll tax idea was actively under “consideration.”
“As (National Economic Council Director Larry Kudlow) said yesterday, more tax cuts for the American people are certainly on the table, but cutting payroll taxes is not something under consideration at this time,” the statement said.
Discussing whether to cut payroll taxes is part of a rapidly evolving effort within the White House to both exude confidence about the economy’s strength while simultaneously hunting for ways to rescue business and consumer confidence. Business spending already has pulled back, in part because of fears about the trade war, but consumer spending has remained robust. If ordinary Americans begin to tighten their belts later this year, the economy could suffer new strain.
Millions of Americans pay a “payroll tax” on their earnings, a 6.2 percent levy that is used to finance Social Security programs. The payroll tax was last cut in 2011 and 2012 during the Obama administration to 4.2 percent, as a way to encourage more consumer spending during the recent economic downturn. But the cut was allowed to reset back up to 6.2 percent in 2013.
Workers pay payroll taxes on income up to $132,900, so cutting the tax has remained a popular idea for many lawmakers, especially Democrats, seeking to deliver savings for middle-income earners and not the wealthiest Americans. But payroll tax cuts can also add dramatically to the deficit and – depending on how they are designed – pull billions of dollars away from Social Security.
The payroll tax cuts during the Obama administration reduced taxes by more than $100 billion each year, but the Obama administration directed the lost revenue to Social Security programs, so those initiatives didn’t lose money. The cuts added to the deficit, however.
The size of the cut could equate to a bigger tax cut for many families than the 2017 tax law.
The Trump administration discussions about whether to pursue a new payroll tax cut have only begun in recent days, the three people said, and specific details about the design have not been reached yet.
Trump and top aides have spent the past few days trying to convince the public that the economy is strong and that fears about a recession are misguided. But White House officials quietly have begun scrambling for new ideas to reverse public concerns and boost business confidence.
Some administration officials have felt that planning for an economic downturn would send a negative perception to the public and make things worse, but Trump has spent much of the past week conferring with business executives and other confidants seeking input on what they are seeing in the economy.
There are signs the U.S. economy is slowing, and economists fear that Germany and the United Kingdom already are tipping towards a recession. So far, consumer spending has remained one of the U.S. economy’s bright spots, and White House officials are aware that Trump’s reelection chances could hinge on the economy staying strong into next year.
Payroll tax cuts have remained popular with Democrats largely because they are seen as targeting working Americans, and the money is often immediately spent by consumers and not saved. That way, the money gives consumers more spending power, but it also helps businesses who rely on the income.
The White House talks are at such an early stage that they have not begun consulting with key lawmakers yet.
A spokesman for Senate Finance Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley said the lawmaker had not discussed a payroll tax cut with the White House, and that “at this point, recession seems to be more of a political wish by Democrats than an economic reality.”
White House officials have become acutely focused on protecting strong levels of consumer spending. That’s because one of the biggest causes of economic downturns is a pullback in consumer spending. That hurts businesses, which then lay off workers, who then cut back on spending — a painful economic loop.
In the past, Democrats have strongly supported payroll tax cuts, while Republicans have been more resistent. Republicans have complained that these cuts do not help the economy and disproportionately harm the deficit.
White House officials have shifted wildly in recent days with varying assessments about the economy. White House economic adviser Larry Kudlow has sought to convey optimism, but Trump has been less consistent.
The president on Monday sought to play down the risk of a recession while also pinning the blame for a potential economic downturn on the Federal Reserve, chastising the central bank’s chairman, Jerome H. Powell, for a “horrendous lack of vision.”
In a tweet, Trump also called for the Fed to reduce interest rates by at least 100 basis points, marking an escalation of his demands on the central bank. Trump has frequently lashed out at Powell but had never used the phrase “basis points” in a tweet or made such a specific demand.
“Our Economy is very strong, despite the horrendous lack of vision by Jay Powell and the Fed, but the Democrats are trying to ‘will’ the Economy to be bad for purposes of the 2020 Election,” Trump tweeted. “Very Selfish! Our dollar is so strong that it is sadly hurting other parts of the world.”
He then declared that interest rates, “over a fairly short period of time, should be reduced by at least 100 basis points, with perhaps some quantitative easing as well.”
“If that happened, our Economy would be even better, and the World Economy would be greatly and quickly enhanced-good for everyone!” he said.
The Fed funds rate, which Trump is trying to tell central bankers to cut, is currently set at 2.25 percent. Slashing it 100 basis points would lower this rate to 1.25 percent, giving them very little additional wiggle room to maneuver if a full-fledged recession began.
His directive for them to launch a new phase of “quantitative easing” is shorthand for asking the Fed to pump more money into the economy, a step that could weaken the U.S. dollar. This is also seen as an extreme step that central bankers take when they are trying to urgently address a slumping economy, not a tactic that is employed when the economy is still growing.
Fed officials have said they do not make decisions based on political pressure, but Trump has taken his attacks on the central bank to new extremes, particularly this month amid numerous signs that the U.S. economy is weakening more than expected.
After a tumultuous week in the markets suggested that the economy is heading onto shaky ground, Trump and his top officials have touted what they believe are the economy’s strengths, particularly consumer spending, and predicted that a recession will not occur.
As concerns mount, Kudlow has scheduled briefing calls this week with state and local business leaders, conservative groups, and others to both guage the economy’s strength and seek more input.
White House spokesman Judd Deere said the calls, which “have been long-planned,” will focus on Trump’s economic agenda, including issues such as deregulation and energy production.
But even as the White House has dismissed the notion that the country may be headed toward a recession, Trump and his aides have sent mixed messages.
In an exchange with reporters in Morristown, N.J., shortly before taking off for Washington on Sunday evening, Trump brushed aside the possibility of a downturn, saying, “I don’t see a recession.”
“I mean, the world is in a recession right now — although that’s too big a statement,” he added, in a remark that appeared to undercut his effort to calm fears.
- Felicia Sonmez contributed to this report."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "The tax plan the Trump administration released Wednesday consists (so far) of a single page of bullet points.
If this were a more rounded plan, we could wait for the tax wonks at various think tanks to run it through their models and tell with some precision how it would affect people at different income levels and who would benefit from different deductions.
Lacking that level of detail, we can know only in broad-brush strokes which Americans would win and which would lose. In a homage to the Trump plan itself, here are those winners and losers in bulleted form.
Winners
■ Businesses with high tax rates. The plan would cut the 35 percent corporate income tax to 15 percent. While few businesses pay the full 35 percent rate, those that pay something close to it are in line for a huge tax cut.Continue reading the main story
■ High-income earners. The plan would reduce the top rate on individual income tax — now 39.6 percent for income over around $470,000 for a married couple — to 35 percent. But that’s only part of the gain for high-income earners. It also would eliminate a 3.8 percent tax, used to help fund Obamacare, that applies to investment income over $250,000 for a couple.
■ People with creative accountants. The 15 percent business tax rate could open a huge loophole for people to receive business income through a limited liability company or other pass-through entity instead of as wages. Depending on how the law is drafted, that could enable some people to pay that low 15 percent rate on their earnings instead of an individual income rate up to 35 percent. People who already receive their income through investment vehicles wouldn’t have to change anything for a windfall.
■ Multimillionaires who want to pass money to their heirs tax-free. The plan would eliminate the estate tax, which currently applies to individuals with estates of $5.5 million or couples with estates worth $11 million.
■ People who still fill out their tax returns by hand. Administration officials said the plan would simplify paying taxes, particularly emphasizing plans to eliminate the alternative minimum tax. The A.M.T. can definitely be annoying, and costly, but if you use an online tax preparation service, the software does most of the work.
■ Retailers and other companies that feared a “border adjustment tax.” The Trump administration did not embrace House Republicans’ big strategy to pay for the tax cut, which was strongly opposed by the retail industry and others that thought they would be losers.
■ Donald J. Trump. It is striking how many of the categories listed above affect the president and his family. He is a high-income earner. He receives income from 564 business entities, according to his financial disclosure form, and could take advantage of the low rate on “pass-through” companies. According to his leaked 2005 tax return, he paid an extra $31 million because of the alternative minimum tax that he seeks to eliminate. And his heirs could eventually enjoy his enormous assets tax-free.
Losers
■ Upper-middle-income people in blue states. The plan would eliminate the federal tax deduction for state and local income tax. If you are in a place where such taxes are high, like New York or California, you would lose a valuable deduction.
■ Deficit hawks. The Trump plan doesn’t come with any estimates of its impact on the federal deficit. But his campaign plan, to which the new document is distinctly similar, was estimated by the analysts at the Tax Policy Center to reduce federal revenue by $6.2 trillion over a decade. That implies either a very large increase in the national debt or huge reductions in federal spending.
■ People who want Congress to pass something. While the Trump plan solves some of the policy contradictions of his earlier promises with a “candy for everyone” approach to cutting taxes, that leaves it with even bigger political contradictions. The plan’s tilt toward businesses and the affluent means that Democratic support will be scarce to nonexistent. A law passed via the Senate’s budget reconciliation process — preventing a filibuster by Democrats and allowing a narrow majority of Republicans to prevail — is not permitted to increase the deficit beyond a 10-year window. That means the major provisions would probably have to be temporary. Even if adjusted to be temporary, the presence of deficit hawks among Republicans would make the Trump plan no slam dunk to pass.Continue reading the main story"
econ_change of article is: none
###
article: "WASHINGTON — The sweeping tax overhaul approved by Congress this week hands Republicans a long-sought achievement they believe will bolster their defenses in next year’s midterm campaign, but party officials concede the measure may only mitigate their losses in what is shaping up to be a punishing election year.
While the tax legislation is broadly unpopular as it reaches President Trump’s desk, the bill offers Republicans the sort of signature accomplishment they have been lacking to galvanize their demoralized donors and many of their voters.
Republican lawmakers, who spent much of this year forced to explain or defend Mr. Trump’s erratic behavior, now have an opportunity to go on the offensive with an issue that unites their increasingly fractious party. And they hope that up-for-grabs voters will reward them should the economy keep growing while their tax bills are falling.
“Once the withholding tables change in January, voters will realize their paychecks are bigger as a result of tax reform,” said Representative Steve Stivers of Ohio, who runs the House Republican campaign arm. But, alluding to past midterm defeats for the party in power at the White House, he acknowledged that “history is against us.”
To reinforce the party’s message, the primary House Republican “super PAC,” the Congressional Leadership Fund, is planning a $10 million advertising and grass-roots campaign beginning next month in some of their most competitive districts to highlight the rate reductions, higher standard deduction and child tax credits in the bill. Corporations such as AT&T and Wells Fargo delivered Republicans an immediate gift by announcing they would reward employees financially because of the tax cut.Continue reading the main story
Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, said in an interview that Senate Republicans next year would batter the many Democrats who are on the ballot in states won by Mr. Trump, such places as North Dakota, West Virginia and Indiana, for opposing the bill.
Yet with voters indicating by wide margins they prefer Democrats to control Congress and bestowing Mr. Trump with historically low approval ratings, the tax plan is hardly a panacea for Republican lawmakers on the ballot in 2018. At best, it is the political equivalent of tacking up plywood against exterior windows to lessen the inevitable damage of an impending storm.
Officials in both parties believe Democratic gains in the House, where Republicans enjoy a 24-seat majority, could reach as high as 40 seats if the political environment does not improve for the Republicans.
And, as of now, it only appears to be worsening.
A CNN poll released on Wednesday found that 56 percent of registered voters said they would vote Democratic next November, compared to 38 percent who favored the Republicans, a yawning 18-percentage-point gap that was only slightly bigger than other recent polls. Through that lens, impressions of the new tax law could be warped by partisan feelings.
This advantage is showing up in fund-raising, where Democrats are harvesting small-dollar contributions. The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee announced on Wednesday that it raised $6.9 million in November, outraising its Republican counterpart for the seventh month in a row. In November, the National Republican Congressional Committee raised only $3.8 million.
House Republicans, however, still have more money on hand and the Republican National Committee has far more cash than the Democratic National Committee. In the Senate, the Democratic campaign arm has slightly more money in the bank than the Republicans.
Beyond the raw numbers, Democratic enthusiasm is soaring. And the sort of centrist voters that both parties covet are contemptuous of Mr. Trump because of his behavior and character, elements that are highly unlikely to change by next fall no matter what policies emerge from Washington.
“The downside of doing nothing was much higher,” former Representative Thomas M. Davis III, a Virginia Republican who previously led the party’s House campaign efforts, said of the tax bill. “But the major problem for Republicans is not that they haven’t delivered — it’s the way he conducts himself.”
“Republicans have a big storm coming at them,” he added. “We just don’t know if it’s a bad wind storm or a Category Five hurricane.”
Mr. Trump has the lowest approval rating of any modern president this soon into his tenure, and midterm elections are inevitably referendums on the party that controls the White House. He is especially unpopular among women, who in this year’s statewide and special elections have overwhelmingly supported Democrats. According to a new NBC News-Wall Street Journal poll, 62 percent of female voters disapproved of Mr. Trump.
So Democrats, some of them still bearing wounds from President Barack Obama’s midterm losses, believe the tax measure will ultimately be of little consequence compared to the man who occupies the Oval Office.
“You can’t run from the top of your ticket,” said Representative Rick Larsen of Washington, who got a scare in the Affordable Care Act-fueled backlash of 2010. “That’s been proven to me over and over again. And the driver won’t be the tax cut vote. It’ll be the unpopularity of the president.”
There is also scant evidence large-scale tax bills offer much in the way of a political lift. Republicans suffered losses in 1982, a year after President Reagan’s first tax bill, and in 1986, just a few months after Congress passed the last tax overhaul. The 2002 gains by Republicans were more the result of a rallying around the commander-in-chief in the months after the attacks of Sept 11, 2001, than the tax cuts that the party passed a year earlier.
Mr. Obama’s economic stimulus plan of 2009 included tax cuts that went straight into paychecks — and were hardly noticed ahead of the Republican Tea Party tidal wave in 2010.
Complicating matters for Republicans, some of their House seats that are most in jeopardy are in high-income and high-tax states where many voters will feel little benefit from a bill that limits mortgage interest deductions and state and local tax write-offs. Eleven of the 12 House Republicans who opposed the bill hail from California, New York and New Jersey, most of them from affluent districts that are already uneasy with Mr. Trump.
“I think each individual congressman will be judged on how they voted,” said Representative Dan Donovan, the only Republican who represents New York City, who opposed the measure because of the limitations on local tax deductions. “The voters will know how hard we fought.”
Yet as the fallout from the Affordable Care Act demonstrated in 2010, when half of the 34 House Democrats who opposed the measure still lost their re-election, opposing a controversial bill is not enough to inoculate lawmakers in wave election years.
“The wave starts in those districts whether they voted for or against the tax bill,” said former Democratic Representative Steve Israel of New York, calling this moment “political déjà vu.”
Notably, the House Republicans who opposed the bill also will not be the beneficiaries of the Super PAC’s spending.
“We’re going to focus on those who kept their promise to their constituents,” said Corry Bliss, who runs the group.
Veteran Republicans are sober about how daunting 2018 is shaping up to be, and hope that a clash on taxes at the very least offers the prospect of shifting the political debate onto more favorable terrain.
“If you’re a Republican and you think about what’s coming, and the range of things you could be fighting about, to have a fight about this tax bill is among the better things they can fight over in 2018,” said Bill McInturff, a G.O.P. pollster, conceding that Republicans are facing “very tough numbers.”
Mr. McInturff, who recently conducted a survey showing Republicans trailing Democrats by 12 points on the so-called generic ballot, said his party could not change the minds of those with fixed views about Mr. Trump, but that the tax bill offered an argument for those willing to hear them out.
“You better have something to say that the 60 percent is willing to listen to,” he said, noting polls that show 40 percent of voters want to impeach Mr. Trump.
Mr. Stivers acknowledged the partisan preferences of voters at the moment were tilting away from Republicans. “Right now there are people that don’t like the president, and they’re expressing it in that way,” he said of the generic ballot. But he suggested that voters uneasy with the president are still willing to support Republican congressional candidates, pointing to the Atlanta-area special House election the party won earlier this year despite a massive influx of money for the Democrats.
And he said he had urged his members to make taxes central. “Everybody needs to be talking about the tax bill, what it means for their communities,” said Mr. Stivers.
Democrats, though, said no piece of legislation could address the depth of the Republican challenge.
“It is unfixable,” said Anna Greenberg, a Democratic pollster. “And by November, tax reform could be a nonissue because what’s driving people to come out to vote is they don’t like the way the country is being run and the comportment of the president.”Continue reading the main story"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) released a massive economic stimulus bill Thursday to fight the coronavirus’s fallout, even as opposition emerged from some key Republicans to one of the central elements of the plan — direct cash payments to many Americans.
President Trump has expressed support for the cash payment approach in recent days, but he has also shifted between numerous ideas amid waves of opposition.
Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.), a close ally of the president’s, was among several GOP senators voicing concern or outright opposition Thursday to the idea of direct payments, even as McConnell unveiled the trillion-dollar stimulus plan that would be the starting point for negotiations with Democrats. McConnell called for those talks to start Friday, and senators said the situation was so dire that they should not recess until they have reached a deal to pass it.
“We are facing the abyss,” said Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.). “We are facing circumstances for which there is no playbook.”
A number of economists have predicted that the U.S. economy is plunging into a recession and that the unemployment rate could soar because many Americans are staying home out of fear of catching the virus. Many businesses are struggling to pay their bills and are laying off workers. The travel industry has been hit particularly hard, but more and more companies are now raising the alarm.
The centerpiece of the Senate GOP plan — building on a proposal revealed Wednesday by the Treasury Department — would be hundreds of billions of dollars sent to Americans in the form of checks as a way to flood the country with money in an effort to blunt the dramatic pullback of spending that has resulted from the coronavirus outbreak.
The legislation would provide checks of $1,200 per adult for many families, as well as $500 for every child in those families. Families filing jointly would receive up to $2,400 for the adults. The size of the checks would diminish for those earning more than $75,000 and phase out completely for those earning more than $99,000. The poorest families, those with no federal income tax liability, would see smaller benefits, though the minimum would be set at $600.
Limiting the payment amount for those without federal tax liability was a change from the original White House proposal, and caught some Republicans off-guard, provoking criticism. Sen. Josh Hawley (R-Mo.) tweeted: “Relief to families in this emergency shouldn’t be regressive. Lower income families shouldn’t be penalized.”
An early analysis showed the vast majority of middle class people would receive the cash payment, but the percentage doing so falls dramatically toward the bottom of the income distribution. About 22 million people earning under $40,000 a year would see no benefit under the GOP plan, according to an initial analysis by Ernie Tedeschi, a former Obama administration economist.
The precise design of the payments had remained fluid as talks on Capitol Hill continued, with lawmakers racing to finalize the legislation. The emerging opposition to the direct payments underscored that key elements of the plan could be very much subject to change — especially since it still must be negotiated with Democrats in both chambers of Congress.
As the administration tries to get ahead of the cascading impacts of the coronavirus, Trump already shifted course once this week, abandoning for now a proposed payroll tax cut in favor of the direct payments, which he said could have a faster impact. Some of his allies, though, are not convinced.
“Direct payments make sense when an economy is beginning to restart. Makes no sense now, because it’s just money. What I want is income, not one check. I want you to get a check you count on every week, not one week,” Graham told reporters, adding that he was about to speak with newly named White House chief of staff Mark Meadows to share his views.
Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Richard C. Shelby (R-Ala.) also voiced opposition to direct cash payments.
“I personally think that if we are going to help people, we ought to direct the cash payments maybe as a supplement to unemployment, not to the people that are still working every day,” Shelby said. “You know, just a blanket cash check to everybody in America that’s making up to $75,000, I don’t know the logic of that.”
Often, congressional leaders will try to get broad support for legislation before introducing it, but many are now rushing to complete a bill, given the growing fears about the economy’s downward trajectory.
Still, the newly voiced opposition to cash payments added to uncertainty about how quickly Congress would be able to finalize the giant stimulus plan that all parties agree is needed as the coronavirus overtakes American life and the economy. Democrats were working on their own proposals, which shun corporate loan programs being included by Republicans — such as $50 billion for airlines — suggesting that there will be difficulty in reaching bipartisan agreement.
Meanwhile the crisis is worsening. Confirmed covid-19 cases in the United States rose past 11,000 on Thursday — including two members of the House, Reps. Mario Diaz-Balart (R-Fla.) and Ben McAdams (D-Utah), bringing the crisis closer to home for lawmakers.
And the details of the big stimulus package keep changing. Trump himself embraced another idea, saying he supports having the federal government take equity stakes in private companies that receive coronavirus bailout funds.
Trump made the comment in response to a question at a briefing of his coronavirus response team, and suggested that different companies could be treated differently on the basis of past behavior. For example, Trump said that companies that have been using excess cash to buy back their stock in recent years — effectively boosting their stock prices instead of investing in new equipment — might be treated more harshly than others.
“I do, I really do,” Trump said, asked whether he would like to see the federal government take a stake in private companies. The federal government took equity stakes, effectively a type of ownership position, in certain companies that were bailed out during the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009. It’s a way of protecting taxpayer investments in firms and ensuring that taxpayers potentially benefit when a company recovers. But the approach is controversial because it essentially involves partial government ownership of private companies.
Questions about how this would work have grown in recent days as more companies and industries plead with the White House and Congress for large amounts of assistance as their operations have been disrupted in recent weeks.
“People are coming in for money. In some cases, no fault of their own,” Trump said, adding that “in some cases, where they did certain things over the course of the years, including by buying back stock, you know, they bought back stock and they paid a high price for it. ... But maybe I view that as a little bit differently than somebody that didn’t and somebody that built plants all over the United States.”
The legislation McConnell released Thursday was based on what he called four “pillars” – payments to small businesses, direct cash payments to individuals, loans to industries decimated by the virus, and a surge in funding to the health-care industry.
The small-business section, which Rubio led, offers loans to small businesses with under 500 employees. The $300 billion for the loans would be made available through lenders certified by the Small Business Administration, such as banks and credit unions, with the maximum loan capped at $10 million. The portion of the loan used by the small businesses to cover their payrolls could be forgiven if firms retain their employees through the end of June 30, 2020. Loans given to firms with tipped employees, such as bars and restaurants, could be forgiven if they are used to provide additional wages to their employees.
The bill also outlines in greater detail the terms for receiving targeted federal help from the federal government, as proposed earlier by the Trump administration. The legislation includes $50 billion in “loans and loan guarantees” for passenger airlines; $8 billion for “cargo air carriers”; and $150 billion for other “eligible businesses,” a category administration officials have suggested could include the hotel and cruise industries. The legislation appears to give the Treasury Department wide authority in determining which businesses qualify for this $150 billion fund.
Democrats have demanded that any firms receiving bailout funding implement reforms such as a $15 minimum wage and an end to stock buybacks. The GOP legislation says that no “officer or employee” of a firm receiving an emergency loan can receive an increase compensation above $425,000 until after March 1, 2022.
“We’re not talking about so-called bailouts for firms that made reckless decisions,” McConnell said. “None of these firms, not corner stores, not pizza parlors, not airlines, brought this on themselves. We’re not talking about a taxpayer-funded cushion for companies that made mistakes. We’re talking about loans which must be repaid.”
Trump’s $1 trillion stimulus is a gamble for reelection — and a sea change for Republicans once opposed to bailouts
Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) has offered his own plan, which skews more toward workers than corporations. And House Democrats, wary of being sidelined as the stimulus bill is negotiated between the White House and Senate Republicans, are trying to assert their power by proposing their own sweeping coronavirus economic rescue package in the coming days.
Schumer and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) said in a joint statement Thursday that Democrats were “united in our commitment” to prioritize worker and health-care concerns.
“That means taking bold action to help workers and small businesses first by greatly increasing unemployment insurance and Medicaid, making massive investments to help small businesses survive, expanding paid sick and family leave, and putting money directly into the hands of those who need it most,” they said.
On a conference calls of Democratic lawmakers Thursday, House committee chairs outlined a litany of legislative proposals — though the fine details were far from resolved and Pelosi offered no firm deadline to finalize a unified rescue plan.
On cash payments, for instance, House Ways and Means Chairman Richard E. Neal (D-Mass.) and Financial Services Committee Chairwoman Maxine Waters (D-Calif.) have outlined dueling proposals, while other Democrats have focused on beefing up existing safety net programs — such as unemployment insurance and Medicaid — as providing more targeted and effective relief.
— Seung Min Kim contributed to this report
Coronavirus: What you need to know
Vaccines: The CDC recommends that everyone age 5 and older get an updated covid booster shot. New federal data shows adults who received the updated shots cut their risk of being hospitalized with covid-19 by 50 percent. Here’s guidance on when you should get the omicron booster and how vaccine efficacy could be affected by your prior infections.
New covid variant: The XBB.1.5 variant is a highly transmissible descendant of omicron that is now estimated to cause about half of new infections in the country. We answered some frequently asked questions about the bivalent booster shots.
Guidance: CDC guidelines have been confusing — if you get covid, here’s how to tell when you’re no longer contagious. We’ve also created a guide to help you decide when to keep wearing face coverings.
Where do things stand? See the latest coronavirus numbers in the U.S. and across the world. In the U.S., pandemic trends have shifted and now White people are more likely to die from covid than Black people. Nearly nine out of 10 covid deaths are people over the age 65.
For the latest news, sign up for our free newsletter."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "F.A.Q. on Stimulus, Unemployment and Tax Rebates
Ron Lieber and
The Senate passed its version of the $1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan on Saturday. The pandemic relief bill now goes back to the House of Representatives, which must approve the Senate’s changes before it can go to President Biden’s desk.
Stimulus Checks
The stimulus payments would be $1,400 for most recipients. Those who are eligible would also receive an identical payment for each of their children.
To qualify for the full $1,400, a single person would need an adjusted gross income of $75,000 or below. For heads of household, adjusted gross income would need to be $112,500 or below, and for married couples filing jointly that number would need to be $150,000 or below.
To be eligible for a payment, a person must have a Social Security number.
Is there a partial payment for higher earners?
Yes. But payments would phase out quickly as adjusted gross income rises.
For single filers, the checks decrease to zero at $80,000. For heads of household, the cutoff is $120,000. And for joint filers, the checks stop at $160,000.
Payments for children decrease in the same way.
Do college students count as eligible dependents?
College students whom taxpayers claim as dependents are eligible. (They weren’t for past payments.) The payment would go to the parent taxpayer, not the child.
Do older relatives who live with us count as eligible dependents?
Good news here, too. If claimed as dependents, these relatives are also eligible this time. The payment would go to the taxpayer, not the dependent adult.
Which year of income determines eligibility?
The most recent year on record at the Internal Revenue Service. If you’ve already filed your taxes this year, it would be 2020. If not, it would be 2019.
During the last round of payments, the I.R.S. got the first payments out within a few days. As before, you would track the status of your payments via the I.R.S.’s Get My Payment tool. Be aware that the volume of users sometimes overwhelms the site.
What should I do if I still haven’t gotten a payment from a past round of stimulus?
If you were in fact eligible to receive it, you can try to recover it through the so-called Recovery Rebate Credit when filing your 2020 return. Make your claim on Line 30 of Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Advertisement
Unemployment Insurance
If you’re already receiving unemployment benefits, payments would generally be extended for another 25 weeks, until Sept. 6. The weekly supplemental benefit, which is provided on top of your regular benefit, will remain $300 but run through Sept. 6.
Although unemployment benefits are taxable, the new law would make the first $10,200 of benefits tax-free for people with income less than $150,000. This applies to 2020 only.
How would the benefit extensions work?
The extended payments would continue to be delivered through different federal programs, largely based on the type of work you did and for whom.
Benefits through the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program, which covers the self-employed, gig workers, part-timers and others who are typically ineligible for regular unemployment benefits, would be available for a total of 75 weeks, up from 50, and run through Sept. 6.
People receiving checks through the Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Compensation program, which essentially extends benefits for people who exhaust their regular state benefits, would be available for a total of 49 weeks, up from 24, also lasting through Sept. 6.
What happens to the supplemental payments?
If you qualify for any benefits, you would also receive the full $300 supplemental payment for weeks ending after March 14 and through Sept. 6. Known as F.P.U.C., it’s called the federal pandemic unemployment compensation.
The bill would also extend an extra $100 weekly payment, called the mixed-earner supplement, through Sept. 6. This payment helps people who have a mix of income from both self-employment and wages paid by other employers, because they are often stuck with a lower state-issued benefit based on their (lower) wages.
The bill would also clarify that both the mixed-earner supplement and the $300 federal supplement are not factored into your income when calculating eligibility for Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program.
Would payments be uninterrupted?
If the bill becomes law, experts said, there may be a gap for beneficiaries in many states because it usually takes a couple of weeks for agencies to program any benefit extensions.
Health Insurance
Buying insurance through the government program known as COBRA would temporarily become a lot cheaper.
COBRA, for the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, generally lets someone who loses a job buy coverage via the former employer. But it’s expensive: Under normal circumstances, a person may have to pay at least 102 percent of the cost of the premium.
Under the relief bill, the government would pay the entire COBRA premium from April 1 through Sept. 30.
A person who qualified for new, employer-based health insurance someplace else before Sept. 30 would lose eligibility for the no-cost coverage. And someone who left a job voluntarily would not be eligible, either.
Will the cost of health insurance I buy through an exchange be affected?
The bill would lower the cost of health insurance in many instances for people who bought their own health insurance via a government exchange. And the premiums for those plans would cost no more than 8.5 percent of your modified adjusted gross income.
These changes would be effective immediately and last through the end of 2022; they would not require people to re-enroll to access the lower prices.
How do I sign up for health insurance?
If you don’t already have health insurance but would want it if the price was right, an open enrollment period is already in effect through May 15. You can also switch plans to try to lower the price you’re paying already or get more generous coverage. The Kaiser Family Foundation maintains a calculator that estimates your premiums based on your income and any available government subsidies, and it will be updated once the bill passes.
Are there any changes to health care flexible spending accounts?
None this time, though there were some in the last stimulus bill.
Taxes
This credit, which helps working families offset the cost of care for children under 13 and other dependents, would be significantly expanded for a single year. More people would be eligible, and many recipients would get a bigger break.
The bill would also make the credit fully refundable, which means you could collect the money as a refund even if your tax bill was zero. “That will be helpful to people at the lower end” of the income scale, said Mark Luscombe, principal federal tax analyst at Wolters Kluwer Tax & Accounting.
How much would the credit be worth?
The new bill would make the credit worth up to $4,000 for one qualifying individual or $8,000 for two or more. The credit would be calculated by taking up to 50 percent of the value of eligible expenses, up to certain limits, depending on your income. (The more you earn, the lower the percentage you can claim.)
Currently, the credit is generally worth between 20 and 35 percent of eligible expenseswith a maximum value of $2,100 for two or more qualifying individuals.
The bill would also significantly increase the income level at which the credit begins to be reduced. Under current law, that starts at an adjusted gross income of $15,000, but the bill would make the full value of the credit available to households making up to $125,000.
Under current law, the credit is not further reduced below 20 percent, regardless of income, Mr. Luscombe said. But the proposed law would begin to reduce the credit below 20 percent for households with income of more than $400,000.
These changes would be effective for 2021 only.
What about dependent care flexible spending accounts?
The bill would make one big change. for 2021 — and only for 2021 — you could set aside $10,500 in a dependent care account instead of the normal $5,000. But employers would have to allow the change: You can’t adjust the withholdings from your paycheck yourself if your employer declines to provide the option.
Advertisement
The bill would make the credit more generous for 2021, particularly for low- and middle-income people.
Currently, the credit is worth up to $2,000 per eligible child. The bill would increase it to as much as $3,000 per child ($3,600 for ages 5 and under). It would also raise the age limit for qualifying children to 17, from 16.
Would it change how the credit worked?
Here’s where it gets interesting: You could receive some of the credit as an advance on your 2021 taxes.
The bill would make the credit fully refundable, which means you can receive money from it as a tax refund even if your tax bill is reduced to zero. And half of that money could be advanced to households over the next six months (based on their 2020 tax information, or 2019 if that was unavailable). It’s not clear how frequently payments would be made — perhaps monthly — but under the bill they would begin in July.
The changes are effective for 2021 only, though at least some Democrats would like to make it permanent.
Who is eligible?
Married couples who have modified adjusted gross income up to $150,000 (or heads of household up to $112,500 and single filers up to $75,000) would receive the full value of the new benefit.
But after that, the extra amount above the original $2,000 credit — either $1,000 or $1,600 per child — is reduced by $50 for every $1,000 in modified adjusted gross income that exceeds those levels. (For joint filers with one child age 6 to 17, the extra amount would be phased out at about $170,000.)
At that point, the tax credit levels out at $2,000, and is then subject to the current income limits. The $2,000 benefit begins to phase out when married filers have adjusted gross income of $400,000 ($200,000 for singles).
How would the advance payments work?
Should the bill become law, the advance payments would total up to half the value of the credit the household is eligible to receive. (The other half would be claimed on the 2021 return.) But exactly how often the payments would be sent out depends on what the Treasury Department decides is feasible.
Here’s how it might work for a couple earning $150,000 or less. With two children, ages 7 and 9, they would be eligible for a $6,000 credit ($3,000 times two). If the payments were made monthly, the family would receive $500 per month starting on July 1 and lasting through the end of the year. The remaining $3,000 would be claimed in 2021 on their tax return.
for 2021 only, the bill would increase for childless households the size of the earned-income tax credit, which helps those at the lower end of the income scale, and make more taxpayers eligible.
The maximum credit amount for childless people would increase to $1,502, from $543.
The bill would also broaden the age range: People without children would be able to claim the credit beginning at age 19 instead of 25, with the exception of certain full-time students. The upper age limit, 65, would be eliminated.
How would separated spouses be affected?
Married but separated people could be treated as not married for the purpose of the credit if they don’t file a joint tax return.
This would apply only if the taxpayer lived with a qualifying child for more than half of the taxable year and didn’t have the same principal home as the spouse at least six months of the year. A separation decree or agreement would also suffice, as long as the individual didn’t live with the spouse by the end of the taxable year.
This change would be permanent.
Are there any other changes?
For the purposes of calculating the credit in the 2021 tax year, taxpayers could choose to use their 2019 income if it was higher than 2021, according to a Senate aide.
People who otherwise would be eligible but whose children do not have Social Security numbers would be permitted to claim the version of the credit available to childless households. This change would be permanent.
Taxpayers wouldn’t be disqualified for the credit in 2021 until they had investment income of $10,000, up from $3,650. This change would be permanent, with the $10,000 threshold indexed to inflation.
Housing
The bill would provide billions of dollars in rental and utility assistance to people who are struggling and in danger of being evicted from their homes.
About $27 billion would go toward emergency rental assistance. The vast majority of it would replenish the so-called Coronavirus Relief Fund, created by the CARES Act and distributed through state, local and tribal governments, according to the National Low Income Housing Coalition. That’s on top of the $25 billion in assistance provided by the relief package passed in December.
To receive financial assistance — which could be used for rent, utilities and other housing expenses — households would have to meet several conditions. Household income could not exceed 80 percent of the area median income, at least one household member must be at risk of homelessness or housing instability, and individuals would have to qualify for unemployment benefits or have experienced financial hardship (directly or indirectly) because of the pandemic.
Lower-income families that have been unemployed for three months or more would be given priority for assistance.
Is there anything for homeowners?
The bill would provide nearly $10 billion to help homeowners struggling with mortgage payments, utility bills and other housing costs.
Roughly $100 million would be dedicated to housing counseling.
How about homeless people?
About $5 billion would be allocated to help the homeless.
Advertisement
Student Loans
There would be a big one for people who already have debt.
You wouldn’t have to pay income taxes on forgiven debt if you qualify for loan forgiveness or cancellation — for example, if you’ve been in an income-driven repayment plan for the requisite number of years, if your school defrauded you or if Congress or the president wipes away $10,000 of debt for large numbers of people.
This would be the case for debt forgiven between Jan. 1, 2021, and the end of 2025."
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "Fed Could Pencil in Higher Interest Rates Next Year While Slowing Hikes in December
Brisk wage growth could lead officials to consider raising their policy rate above 5% in 2023 to fight inflation
Federal Reserve officials have signaled plans to raise their benchmark interest rate by 0.5 percentage point at their meeting next week, but elevated wage pressures could lead them to continue lifting it to higher levels than investors currently expect.
They have raised rates this year at the fastest pace since the early 1980s, including by 0.75 point at each of their past four meetings to combat inflation. Fed Chair Jerome Powell indicated last week that the central bank was prepared to downshift the size of rate increases at its coming meeting on Dec. 13-14.
Continue reading your article with
View Membership Options
a WSJ membership
Already a member? Sign In
Sponsored Offers
-
GoPro:
Student Discount - $100 off the GoPro HERO11
-
Samsung:
Save up to 40% + free shipping - Samsung coupon code
-
Dell:
Save up to 30% + free shipping with Dell coupons
-
The Motley Fool:
New members save 55% on Stock Advisor
-
Wayfair:
Up to 15% off + free shipping at Wayfair
-
American Eagle Outfitters:
Sign up for emails and get 10% off American Eagle promo code
Most Popular News
-
In Georgia, Midterm Turnout and Blank Ballots Might Reveal Who Has the Edge
-
How Nascar Turned This Lakefront Community Into One of America’s Hottest Luxury Housing Markets
-
The Hotel Inside the Bass Pro Shops Inside the Pyramid
-
Sam Bankman-Fried Says He Can’t Account for Billions Sent to Alameda
-
Apple Makes Plans to Move Production Out of China"
econ_change of article is: none
###
article: "Donald Trump Says He’s ‘Not Happy’ About Federal Reserve Interest-Rate Increases
Comments break with tradition that presidents refrain from commenting on monetary policy
President Donald Trump delivered a rare presidential critique of the Federal Reserve, saying he hoped the central bank would stop raising interest rates.
“I am not happy about it,” Mr. Trump said about interest-rate increases, in an interview Thursday with CNBC.
Related
- Fed’s Powell Presents Lawmakers With a Charm Offensive (July 16)
- A Brief History of the Federal Reserve’s Independence (June 13)
- Fed Raises Interest Rates, Sets Stage for Two More Increases in 2018 (June 13)
- A Brief History of White House Officials Trying to Jawbone the Fed (June 6)
- Fed Raises Interest Rates, Remains on Track to Keep Tightening (March 15)
- Fed’s Powell Says Central Banks Can’t Take Independence for Granted (May 25)
- Jerome Powell Sworn In as Federal Reserve Chairman (Feb. 5)
- President Trump Says Jerome Powell Is His Choice to Lead Federal Reserve (Nov. 2, 2017)
- Donald Trump Attacks Federal Reserve, Yellen During Debate (Sept. 26, 2016)
His comments departed from a convention in which presidents have refrained from speaking specifically on monetary policy.
The Fed raised its benchmark rate twice this year, in March and in June, to a range between 1.75% and 2%. Central bank officials have penciled in two more rate increases this year.
Fed Chairman Jerome Powell was tapped by Mr. Trump last November to succeed Janet Yellen, and he took his post in February.
Mr. Trump, a Republican, said he was “not thrilled” because every time the economy strengthens “they want to raise rates again.” But he said he wouldn’t interfere with the Fed. “I’m letting them do what they feel is best,” he said.
Mr. Trump also called Mr. Powell a “very good man” in the portion of the interview that aired Thursday.
Analysts said Mr. Trump’s comments were unlikely to sway the Fed’s rate-setting decisions, and if anything, they could backfire by forcing the central bank to affirm its independence. Marc Sumerlin, managing partner at economic consulting firm Evenflow Macro, said the already-high likelihood of a rate increase in September had climbed higher after Mr. Trump’s remarks.
“If the president publicly tells a Fed chair to stop, they have to keep going,” said Mr. Sumerlin, who served as an adviser to former President George W. Bush. “Trump’s being counterproductive to his own goal because any time a president says publicly to stop, a central bank can’t.”
Even if the president’s unhappiness doesn’t influence the Fed, the comments risk calling the Fed’s independence into question if the central bank, on its own, concluded it needed to slow its gradual pace of rate increases, analysts said.
Central bankers have long argued for independence from political pressure. They said it gives investors greater confidence that officials will make unpopular decisions in the long-run best interest of the economy—such as raising rates to curb inflation—as former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker did in the early 1980s.
Political pressure on former Fed chairmen William McChesney Martin by the Johnson administration and on Arthur Burns by the Nixon administration to follow easy-money policies is widely blamed for the inflation surges of the 1970s.
The Fed is charged by Congress to maximize employment and maintain stable prices, and its leadership today seeks inflation of 2% because it sees that level as reflecting a healthy economy.
With the economy expanding solidly and the unemployment rate falling to its lowest levels in decades, the central bank has been gradually raising rates from historically very low levels to keep growth on an even keel.
Both of the Fed’s rate increases this year have been approved unanimously. Mr. Trump has filled two of seven seats on the Fed’s board of governors, which has four vacancies. The Senate hasn’t yet confirmed Mr. Trump’s three additional nominees, all of whom have said they won’t allow political considerations to influence their decision-making.
The upshot is that Mr. Trump has few means to directly influence the Fed. If all the president’s remaining nominees were confirmed, he would have only one vacancy left to fill on the board.
Fed governors serve fixed terms and cannot be removed from office by the president because of a policy dispute.
Former Fed Vice Chairman Donald Kohn, now at the Brookings Institution, said he didn’t expect Mr. Trump’s comments Thursday to influence Mr. Powell, who goes by Jay. “I’m completely confident that the Fed, under Jay’s leadership, will continue to do whatever is necessary to achieve its dual mandate,” he said.
A Fed spokeswoman declined to comment Thursday.
The president, who has previously expressed support for a weaker dollar, said he was frustrated that rising interest rates had caused the U.S. dollar to strengthen against other currencies.
Europe’s “making money easy, and their currency is falling,” Mr. Trump told CNBC. “China, their currency is dropping like a rock. Our currency is going up. I have to tell you, it puts us at a disadvantage.”
A stronger greenback makes U.S. exports relatively more expensive on world markets.
The dollar weakened slightly against other major currencies when CNBC aired Mr. Trump’s remarks, with the WSJ Dollar Index moving lower shortly after 1 p.m. EDT. It later recouped some of those losses.
Mr. Powell, who hasn’t met with or spoken to Mr. Trump since his confirmation, said last week he wasn’t worried about political pressure from the White House.
“We have a long tradition here of conducting policy … independent of all political concerns. Wedo our work in a strictly nonpolitical way, based on detailed analysis, which we put on the record transparently,” Mr. Powell said in an interview with American Public Media’s “Marketplace” radio program.
The nonpolitical approach “is deep in our DNA,” Mr. Powell added.
The Fed cut its benchmark rate to near zero to boost demand after the 2008 financial crisis, and it held the rate there far longer than many observers expected. Officials began to gradually lift rates in late 2015. Last fall, the central bank also began to slowly shrink the $4.3 trillion bond portfolio it amassed during several rounds of asset purchases designed to lower long-term rates and further stimulate growth.
While former President Ronald Reagan was reluctant to publicly question Mr. Volcker, his White House frequently criticized Fed policy and nominated several governors who outvoted Mr. Volcker, a rare rebuke.
Former President George H.W. Bush, when he was vice president and seeking the presidency in 1988, fretted publicly that the Fed might take steps to slow the economy. Some White House officials blamed Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan for not cutting rates quickly enough after the 1990-91 recession, which they thought cost Mr. Bush his 1992 re-election bid.
In 1993, a top adviser to then-President Bill Clinton began enforcing a rule within the White House that the Fed’s policy decisions shouldn’t be publicly questioned. That rule largely held under the administrations of George W. Bush and Barack Obama. It also was followed until this year in Mr. Trump’s White House.
Former White House economic adviser Gary Cohn emphasized to colleagues the importance to markets of not publicly second-guessing monetary policy decisions. He left the White House in April.
After a portion of Mr. Trump’s interview aired on Thursday, a White House spokeswoman issued a statement that read in part, “Of course the president respects the independence of the Fed.”
Mr. Trump said during the interview that he knew some people didn’t think it was appropriate for the president to comment on interest rates or the dollar, but he said of those concerns, “I couldn’t care less what they say.”
At a conference in Sweden earlier this year, Mr. Powell said an erosion of trust in public institutions had created special challenges for central banks. Those institutions “cannot take our measure of independence for granted,” he said.
Write to Nick Timiraos at nick.timiraos@wsj.com
Appeared in the July 20, 2018, print edition as 'Breaking Custom, Trump Raps Fed.'
Most Popular Videos
Most Popular Articles
-
Trump Aides Did Damage Control on Air Force One After Putin Meeting
-
First Test Drive of the Tesla Model 3 Performance: A Thrilling, Modern Marvel
-
Trump Criticizes Fed Rate Rises in Break With Policy Custom
-
Holy Director’s Cut, Batman! ‘Justice League’ Fans Demand New Version of a Superhero Flop
-
A Nearly Century-Old Steam Pipe Explodes in Manhattan"
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "WASHINGTON — The Federal Reserve said Wednesday that the United States economy was slowing more than it had previously thought and painted a far less rosy economic picture than the White House as it left interest rates unchanged and signaled little appetite for raising them again in the near future.
Jerome H. Powell, the Fed chairman, said the economy “is in a good place” in a news conference. But he and his colleagues said growth appeared to be slowing from last year, under the weight of the Trump administration’s trade war, economic slowdowns in Europe and China and fading stimulus from the Republican tax cuts of 2017.
The Fed now expects 2.1 percent growth this year, down from the 2.3 percent it forecast in December — and more than a percentage point less than the 3.2 percent growth the White House predicts. The outlook for 2020 is even more bleak, with the Fed now projecting growth of just 1.9 percent.
The downbeat assessment comes as the Fed sees signs of weakness in areas like consumer spending and business investment, which Mr. Powell said “suggest that growth is slowing somewhat more than expected.” Average monthly job growth, while strong, “appears to have stepped down from last year’s strong pace,” he added.
Mr. Powell tried to reassure markets by saying “economical fundamentals are still very strong,” but he acknowledged that recent developments both domestically and abroad were making it harder for the American economy to grow as quickly as it did last year.
“We see a situation where the European economy has slowed substantially,” he said, adding that China’s economy has also weakened.
Forecasts released at the end of the two-day meeting show the typical member of the Federal Open Market Committee now expects not to raise rates at all this year, an abrupt halt to what had been five consecutive quarters of rate increases to the current range of 2.25 to 2.5 percent. Most officials now expect a single rate increase in 2020 and none in 2021. In December, when forecasts were last released, Fed officials said they expected two rate increases this year and another in 2020.
Mr. Powell showed little concern about inflation — which has stayed below the Fed’s 2 percent target — rising to levels that would trigger an immediate rate increase in order to prevent a rapid escalation of prices across the economy.
Instead, Mr. Powell did not rule out the possibility — based on the current condition of the economy — that the central bank’s next move could be a rate cut. “The data are not currently sending a signal that we need to move in one direction or another,” he said.
By signaling it will not raise rates without a clear change in conditions, the Fed is effectively giving Mr. Trump what he wants from monetary policy, but with a twist. The president has publicly pushed Mr. Powell to stop raising rates. But if the Fed is correct and growth falls well below 3 percent this year, without a single rate increase, it will be difficult for Mr. Trump to pin the blame on Mr. Powell.
The 1.9 percent growth the Fed now expects in 2020 is down from a 2 percent forecast in December. But the projections include even worse possibilities: At least one committee member forecasts growth of only 1.6 percent for 2019. In December, the lowest forecast was 2 percent for the year.
White House officials see growth staying above 3 percent for the next few years, provided Mr. Trump can continue implementing his economic agenda, including another round of tax cuts, a $1 trillion infrastructure plan and additional deregulation.
Most private forecasters’ growth predictions for this year run closer to the Fed’s than the White House’s. That includes the chief executives of the Business Roundtable, who said in a quarterly survey released Wednesday that their expectations for sales, hiring and investment fell at the start of the year. They predict the economy will grow 2.5 percent in 2019.
The gap between White House and Fed forecasts has never been wider in the years since the Great Recession ended in 2009. The two outlooks have clashed in the past — during the terms of Presidents George Bush and George W. Bush — for fundamental reasons, said Diane Swonk, the chief economist at Grant Thornton.
“One is a forecast that is meant to be as accurate as possible and produce the best monetary policy outcomes,” Ms. Swonk said. “The other is a forecast that can’t escape political and ideological desires.”
The diverging forecasts underscore the differences in how the administration and the Fed judge both the risks to economic growth this year and the evidence that Mr. Trump’s tax cuts have fundamentally strengthened the economy.
Administration officials insist that the $1.5 trillion tax cut will continue to accelerate business investment and draw more and more workers into the labor force, accelerating growth. Mr. Trump promoted his economic plan in Lima, Ohio, on Wednesday, saying it would produce record job and wage growth.
“We just came out, another chart, we just came out with numbers, the economic report of the president, 3.1 percent G.D.P., the first time in 14 years,” Mr. Trump said, referring to data showing economic output rose 3.1 percent in the fourth quarter of 2018 from a year earlier. While the Fed expressed concern that Mr. Trump’s trade policies could drag down growth, the president said his tariffs on imported metals and Chinese goods were bringing jobs back to America.
“Everyone said you couldn’t do it, you couldn’t bring back manufacturing jobs,” he said. “You would need a magic wand. We are bringing them back beyond anybody’s expectations.”
Mr. Powell said on Wednesday that it was difficult to discern the law’s permanent effects on the supply of workers and productivity.
“We hope they’re very large,” he said.
Asked about the Fed’s deviation from the White House’s economic growth projections that were released on Tuesday, Mr. Powell said he had not seen those numbers.
“The Fed underscored patience and a strong desire to allow inflation to run above target,” researchers at Bank of America Merrill Lynch said in a research note. “As Powell said in his opening remarks, the Fed’s overarching goal is to sustain the economic expansion. This unprecedented dovish turn clearly shows such commitment.”
Yields on the 10-year Treasury note — a bellwether for a range of consumer borrowing rates — dropped sharply after the Fed statement was released as investors digested the potential that the Fed could be done raising rates for some time. The yield on the 10-year Treasury fell to 2.52 percent — its lowest level since January 2018. Stocks, which had been negative for most of the day, rallied and briefly regained positive territory after the announcement. However, they lost steam in the last hour of trading, and the S&P 500 closed down 0.3 percent.
Analysts had been expecting the Fed to shift its forecasts at the meeting, but not by this much.
Eleven committee members said they do not expect any rate increases this year. Four said they expected one. None expected a rate cut. In 2020, a majority of members expected at least one rate increase, although some expected none.
Fed officials also announced that they would end an effort to slim the central bank’s massive holdings of government-backed securities in September, after slowing it down in May. The Fed accumulated $4.5 trillion worth of Treasury and mortgage-backed securities in an effort to stimulate the economy after the Great Recession. It has been slowly winnowing those holdings as the economy has recovered.
Many analysts had expected officials to announce the September end of the balance sheet wind-down, which Mr. Powell had foreshadowed in a recent speech at Stanford University. By October, the Fed said on Wednesday, officials will be shifting the composition of the balance sheet, moving out of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities and into primarily Treasury bonds.
Officials appeared to hasten to end the balance sheet reduction under pressure from financial markets. Many analysts blamed stock market volatility in December and January on the Fed’s wind-down process.
In announcing the end of the reduction, Fed officials acknowledged that they were stopping short of what many analysts had expected when the reduction began. They said the total holdings on the balance sheet once the wind-down ends “will likely still be somewhat above the level of reserves necessary to efficiently and effectively implement monetary policy.”
Carrying a larger-than-expected balance sheet — and operating with interest rates at what remain historically low levels — could hinder the Fed in battling an economic downturn in the near future."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "Fed Faces Mixed Signals as Hiring Cooled in August
U.S. payrolls rose by 151,000 last month, while jobless rate held steady at 4.9%
WASHINGTON—Hiring cooled in August but remained consistent with steady U.S. job growth capable of holding down unemployment, leaving Federal Reserve policy makers to interpret mixed signals.
Nonfarm payrolls rose by a seasonally adjusted 151,000 last month, the Labor Department said Friday. The unemployment rate, calculated from a separate survey of American households, was 4.9% in August, unchanged from July. Economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal had expected employers would add 180,000 jobs and forecast an unemployment rate of 4.8%.
More
- Analysis: Mixed Signals for September Meeting
- Recap: August Jobs Report
- August Jobs Report, by the Numbers
- The Jobs Report in 15 Charts
- U.S. Stocks Rise After Jobs Report
- Signal From the Markets: A Middling Jobs Report Is a Good Jobs Report
- Economists React: ‘Hiring Fell Back to Earth’
- Jobs Report No Boon for Either Candidate
The August payroll gain was a slowdown from the more than 270,000 jobs added in each of the prior two months. But many economists expected moderating growth, believing the economy is nearing full employment. U.S. employers added enough jobs to absorb most new entrants into the labor, keeping the unemployment rate in the range most Fed policy makers view as the longer-term average. Economists surveyed by the Journal earlier this year estimated on average the U.S. only needed to add 145,000 jobs each month to keep up with growth in the labor force.
The latest data is the last broad measure of the labor market that Fed officials will see before meeting on Sept. 20-21. The figures could spark a vigorous discussion between policy makers who see the economy as healthy enough to absorb a rate increase and those concerned about low inflation, middling economic growth and uncertainty from the presidential election and global turmoil.
“While the report is solid,” said Quincy Krosby, Market Strategist at Prudential Financial. “It falls short of providing a resounding vote for a September move by the Fed.”
Several economists noted Friday that the August payroll figure often comes in below forecasts and then is revised up in subsequent months. That further complicates the decision in front of the Fed in less than three weeks.
“Even if Fed officials are suspicious, they will want to wait another couple of months to ensure the data does rebound in September and that August is revised higher,” said Capital Economics economist Paul Ashworth.
There are worrisome signs outside the job market. U.S. economic growth has held near 1% for three straight quarters, anemic gains even by the standards of the lackluster expansion. Business investment has decreased this year, corporate profits are soft and threats from economic weakness abroad still loom.
Friday’s report produced a mixed picture on wages as well. Average hourly earnings for private-sector workers rose by 3 cents, or 0.1%, in August from July to $25.73. Earnings were up 2.4% from a year earlier. That could suggest the sub-5% unemployment rate is putting modest upward pressure on wages.
But annual growth slowed from 2.7% the prior month, the best gain in seven years. The slower growth could reflect the mix of hiring in August tilting toward typically lower-paying fields.
Employment at restaurants grew by a seasonally adjusted 34,000; retailers added 15,100 jobs; social-assistance jobs grew by 21,700. In contrast, there were job cuts in often better paying fields. The manufacturing sector shed 14,000 jobs. Employment in both the mining sector, which includes the oil and gas industry, and the construction sector also shrank in August.
The government added 25,000 jobs last month, and the private-service sector grew by 150,000.
U.S. employers have added jobs at a 182,000 monthly pace so far this year. That is down from average gains in 2015 and 2014—the best two years for employment growth since 1999—but consistent with average growth over the past two economic expansions.
In some ways, the labor market may be finding its level. After falling during most of the expansion, the unemployment rate has been little changed this year. The labor-force participation rate held steady at 62.8% in August. The rate has inched up slightly since touching a four-decade low of 62.4% in September 2015.
Another measure of unemployment and underemployment, including Americans who are working part time because they can’t find full-time jobs, also held steady at 9.7% in August. That rate has changed little this year, and remains elevated relative to previous periods when the unemployment rate was below 5%.
The average workweek last month decreased by 0.1 hour to 34.3 hours.
The health of the labor market, and the broader economy, is an important issue in the U.S. presidential election.
Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton’s campaign in part is based on President Barack Obama’s record, which includes consistent job creation since late 2010, after the economy emerged from a deep recession. Mrs. Clinton has said, if elected, she would boost jobs though investment in infrastructure and green technology.
Republican Donald Trump often points out the current expansion features the weakest average annual growth of any since World War II. He says his trade and tax policies will lead to more high-paying jobs for Americans.
Write to Eric Morath at eric.morath@wsj.com and Anna Louie Sussman at anna.sussman@wsj.com"
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "Covid-19 Live Updates: W.H.O. Team in Wuhan Says It’s ‘Extremely Unlikely’ That Virus Came From Lab
World Health Organization scientists who are tracing the pandemic’s origin in China said the coronavirus had probably spread through an animal host.
A team of World Health Organization scientists said on Tuesday in China that the coronavirus had probably first spread to humans through an animal and was “extremely unlikely” to have been the result of a lab accident.
The findings, delivered after 12 days of field work by the team visiting Wuhan, China, were the first step in a painstaking process to trace the pandemic’s origins, a question that is critical to helping prevent a recurrence.
“All the work that has been done on the virus and trying to identify its origin continue to point toward a natural reservoir,” said Dr. Peter K. Ben Embarek, a food safety scientist with the W.H.O. who is leading the team of experts. He was speaking at a news conference in Wuhan, the city where the coronavirus was first discovered late in 2019.
Dr. Embarek dismissed the idea that the virus might have emerged from a laboratory in Wuhan, a theory that has gained currency among some officials and experts in the United States and elsewhere. “It was very unlikely that anything could escape from such a place,” he said, citing safety protocols.
The W.H.O. experts largely focused their comments on the scientific aspects of their mission, but the inquiry has been in many ways overshadowed by politics. The Chinese government has continued to suggest that the virus may have originated overseas, an idea that many scientists discount. Chinese officials on Tuesday used the news conference to promote this theory, arguing that the search for the virus’s origin should focus on places outside China.
The investigation will “not be restricted to any location,” said Liang Wannian, who led the team of Chinese scientists assisting in the W.H.O. mission.
The W.H.O. experts at the three-hour news conference did not challenge the statements by the Chinese officials. They pledged to examine reports of early cases of the virus outside China. They also called for more research into the animals that were sold at a sprawling market in Wuhan where some of the first cases of the virus were detected.
For the W.H.O., the visit also served as a chance to dispel criticism that it is too deferential to China.
For months, experts and politicians have denounced the W.H.O. for allowing the Chinese government to control the inquiry into the source of the pandemic. Chinese officials, wary of drawing attention to missteps during the outbreak, repeatedly delayed the visit by W.H.O. experts and sought to limit the scope of their mission. The Chinese government, acquiescing to growing global pressure, allowed the team of 14 scientists into Wuhan last month.
People with dementia have significantly greater risk of contracting the coronavirus, and are much more likely to be hospitalized and die from it, than people without dementia do, a new study of millions of medical records in the United States has found.
Their risk could not be entirely explained by characteristics common to people with dementia that are known risk factors for Covid-19: old age, living in a nursing home, and having conditions like obesity, asthma, diabetes and cardiovascular disease. After researchers adjusted for those factors, Americans with dementia were still twice as likely to have gotten Covid-19 as of late last summer.
“It’s pretty convincing in suggesting that there’s something about dementia that makes you more vulnerable,” said Dr. Kristine Yaffe, a professor of neurology and psychiatry at the University of California, San Francisco, who was not involved in the study.
The study found that Black people with dementia were nearly three times as likely as white people with dementia to become infected with the virus, a finding that experts said probably reflects the fact that people of color generally have been disproportionately harmed during the pandemic.
“This study highlights the need to protect patients with dementia, especially those who are Black,” the authors wrote.
The study was led by researchers at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland who analyzed electronic health records of 61.9 million people age 18 and older in the United States from Feb. 1 through Aug. 21, 2020. The data, collected by IBM Watson Health Explorys, came from 360 hospitals and 317,000 health care providers across all 50 states and represented a fifth of the American population, the authors said.
The researchers found that out of 15,770 patients with Covid-19, 810 of them also had dementia. When the researchers adjusted for general demographic factors — age, sex and race — they found that people with dementia had more than three times the risk of getting Covid-19. When they adjusted for Covid-specific risk factors like nursing home residency and underlying physical conditions, the gap closed somewhat, but people with dementia were still twice as likely to become infected.
Experts and the study authors said the reasons for this vulnerability might include cognitive and physiological factors.
“Folks with dementia are more dependent on those around them to do the safety stuff, to remember to wear a mask, to keep people away through social distancing,” said Dr. Kenneth Langa, a professor of medicine at the University of Michigan who was not involved in the study. “There is the cognitive impairment and the fact that they are more socially at risk.”
Advertisement
As the European Union began its campaign to line up vaccines, it was slower off the mark, focused on prices while the United States and Britain made money no object, and succumbed to an abundance of regulatory caution. All of those things have left the bloc flat-footed as drugmakers fall behind on their promised orders.
But the 27 countries of the European Union are also attempting something they have never tried before and have broken yet another barrier in their deeper integration — albeit shakily — by casting their lot together in the vaccine hunt.
In doing so, they have inverted the bloc’s usual power equation. Bigger, richer countries like Germany and France — which could have afforded to sign contracts directly with drugmakers, as the United States and Britain did — saw their vaccine campaigns delayed by the more cumbersome joint effort, while smaller countries wound up with better supply terms than they were likely to have negotiated on their own.
For the bulk of E.U. nations, that experiment has been beneficial. But it has not necessarily been greeted happily in the wealthiest countries, and it has left leaders like Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and President Emmanuel Macron of France open to criticism at home.
They and E.U. leaders have nonetheless stood by their decision and the impulse for solidarity, even as the finger-pointing has begun.
“What would people have said if Germany and France had been in competition with one another for the purchase or production of vaccines? That would have been chaos,” Mr. Macron said at a news conference on Friday after a virtual meeting with Ms. Merkel. “That would have been counterproductive, economically and from a public health perspective, because we will only come out of this pandemic when we have vaccinated enough people in Europe.”
But even as the leaders of Europe’s traditional power duo talked up the 2.3 billion doses ordered as an indication of the wisdom of a joint approach, they conceded that a full campaign could not be expected before March.
Just over 3 percent of E.U. nationals had received at least one vaccine dose by the end of last week, compared with 17 percent in Britain and 9 percent in the United States.
A million doses of the AstraZeneca-Oxford vaccine had been shipped recently to South Africa from India. The first injections were set for Wednesday. After weeks of rich countries vaccinating doctors and nurses against the coronavirus, a respite from the anxiety and the trauma seemed to be nearing in South Africa, too.
Then, all of a sudden, the plans were shelved. The country’s leaders on Sunday ordered the rollout of the vaccine halted after a clinical trial failed to show that it could prevent people from getting mild or moderate cases of Covid-19 caused by the coronavirus variant that has overrun the country.
The new findings from South Africa were far from conclusive: They came from a small clinical trial that enrolled fewer than 2,000 people. And they did not preclude what some scientists say is the likelihood that the vaccine protects against severe disease from the variant — a key indicator of whether the virus will overwhelm hospitals and kill people.
But even if the vaccine is shown to prevent severe disease, scientists say, what happened in South Africa is a warning to the world. As quickly as scientists developed vaccines, the virus has seemed to evolve even more quickly. Instead of eradicating the virus, scientists now foresee months, if not years, of vaccine makers continually having to update their booster shots to protect against new variants.
And if the variant first seen in South Africa, now present in 32 countries, becomes the dominant form of the virus elsewhere, those countries could face a far slower crawl out of the pandemic.
The news was not all bad. Other vaccines offer some protection against the variant from South Africa, though less than against earlier versions of the virus. Among them is Johnson & Johnson’s vaccine, which prevented hospitalizations and deaths in clinical trials in the country. Despite not yet being authorized there, it could be rolled out to some health workers by mid-February as part of what officials vaguely described as “a research project.”
AstraZeneca is working to produce a version of its vaccine that can protect against the variant from South Africa by the fall.
Still, the findings rattled scientists, undercutting the notion that vaccines alone will stop the spread of the virus anytime soon. And they led to new, and more urgent, demands that richer countries donate doses to poorer countries that could become breeding grounds for mutations if the virus spreads unchecked.
A number of coronavirus variants are raising worries that they may draw out the pandemic or make vaccines less effective. Here are four that have been in the news lately and what we know about them.
B.1.1.7
First emerged in Britain.
Thought to be about 50 percent more infectious than earlier versions.
Preliminary evidence suggests that it is about 35 percent more deadly.
Current vaccines appear to work well against it.
This variant has been detected in more than 70 countries, including the United States, where it is doubling roughly every 10 days. Experts predict that it could become the country’s dominant source of infection by March. Learn more about B.1.1.7.
B.1.351
First identified in South Africa.
Vaccines may be less effective against it.
South Africa halted its use of the AstraZeneca-Oxford vaccine on Sunday after evidence emerged that the vaccine did not protect against mild or moderate illness caused by B.1.351. The variant has spread to at least 24 countries, including the United States, where it has been detected in Maryland, South Carolina and Virginia.
P.1
First emerged in Brazil.
May be able to overcome immunity developed after infection by other variants.
A close relative of B.1.351, this variant has spread to several countries, including the United States, where it has been detected in Minnesota and Oklahoma.
CAL.20C
First discovered in California.
It is not yet clear whether it is more infectious.
This variant was found in more than half of the coronavirus test samples that were screened in Los Angeles.
For more information and the latest news on these variants, check our tracker.
Jonathan Corum and
Advertisement
Democrats roll out a plan to send $1,400 stimulus payments to Americans earning up to $75,000 a year.
House Democrats on Monday rolled out a main plank of President Biden’s stimulus plan, proposing legislation to send direct payments of $1,400 to Americans earning up to $75,000 and households with incomes up to $150,000.
The plan, drafted the day before key committees are scheduled to begin meeting to consider it, is at odds with proposals from some Republicans and moderate Democrats who want to curtail eligibility for direct payments, targeting it to lower-income people. Mr. Biden has said he is open to such modifications.
For now, the measure would allow individuals paid up to $100,000 and households up to $200,000 to be eligible for some payment, though the size of the checks would phase out gradually for those with incomes above $75,000, or $150,000 for a family.
The bill, unveiled by Representative Richard E. Neal, Democrat of Massachusetts and the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, was one of a series that Democrats presented on Monday ahead of a week of legislative work to solidify the details of Mr. Biden’s stimulus proposal.
The decision to keep the income cap at the same level as the last round of stimulus payments comes after days of debate among the House Democratic caucus over the size of the checks. Some moderates pushed to restrict the full amount to those who make $50,000 or less and households making up to $100,000.
The legislation also includes significant changes to the tax code and an increase in an extension of weekly federal unemployment benefits. It would raise the $300-a-week payment to $400 a week and continue the program — currently slated to begin lapsing in March — through the end of August.
The $1.9 trillion plan would also provide for billions of dollars for schools, colleges, small businesses, and a provision that would increase the federal minimum wage to $15 by 2025, a progressive priority.
With nearly a year of coronavirus experience behind them, leaders at many universities in the United States ushered in the new term pledging not to repeat the errors of last year, when infection rates soared on campuses and in the surrounding communities.
But although most schools have pledged to increase testing, it is an expensive proposition at a time when many are struggling financially, and not all are testing students as often as recommended by public health experts.
The plans to keep the virus under control, for example, at the University of Michigan — which had more than 2,500 confirmed cases by the end of the fall semester — included increasing testing, offering more courses online, limiting dorm rooms to one occupant and offering no tolerance for rules violations. Yet already more than 1,000 new virus cases have been announced by the school since Jan. 1.
Other universities across the country have also encountered obstacles to a smooth spring, including the unexpected challenge of emerging variants — detected in recent days at the University of Texas at Austin, the University of Miami, Tulane University in New Orleans and the University of California, Berkeley — and the more common problem of recalcitrant students.
At Vanderbilt University in Nashville, students returning after winter break were required to be tested upon arrival and were then asked to avoid social interactions while awaiting results. But some had other ideas.
“We identified a cluster of positive Covid-19 cases linked to students who did not follow the arrival shelter-in-place rules,” a campuswide email reported on Jan. 23, blaming two student organizations for violating protocols. “More than 100 students are now in quarantine.”
The foundation of most university plans for the spring semester centers on increased testing to identify infected students before they display symptoms, and then placing them in isolation. The testing push has grown since July, when a study recommended that students be tested twice a week to better detect asymptomatic infections.
The American College Health Association later embraced the idea, issuing guidelines in December. “For the spring, we specifically recommend that all students are tested on arrival and twice a week thereafter if possible,” said Gerri Taylor, a co-chair of the organization’s Covid-19 task force.
Ms. Taylor said her organization did not know what percentage of schools had adopted the recommendations, and a survey of colleges across the country revealed a variety of requirements, ranging from voluntary testing to mandatory testing twice a week.
Stephanie Saul and
Global Roundup
In Bolivia, bodies are piling up at homes and on the streets again, echoing the horrific images of last summer, when a deadly surge in coronavirus infections overwhelmed the country’s fragile medical system. The Bolivian police say that in January they recovered 170 bodies of people thought to have died from Covid-19, and health officials say intensive-care units are full.
“When 10 or 20 patients die, their beds are full again in a few hours,” said Carlos Hurtado, a public health epidemiologist in Santa Cruz, Bolivia’s largest city.
The resurgence of the virus in Bolivia is part of a larger second wave throughout Latin America, where some of the world’s strictest quarantine measures are giving way to pandemic fatigue and concerns about the economy.
The International Monetary Fund said on Monday that it was revising its 2021 growth forecast for Latin America and the Caribbean to 4.1 percent from 3.6 percent. Warning that the surge in cases could threaten an economic recovery that is already expected to take longer than in other parts of the world, the fund predicted that regional output will not return to pre-pandemic levels until 2023.
While the number of new cases is falling, deaths remain at near-record highs in many parts of the region, just as some governments begin vaccination efforts.
Brazil and Mexico have each been averaging over 1,000 daily Covid-19 deaths for weeks; their total pandemic death toll is now surpassed only by that of the United States. Deaths in Brazil have matched their summer peak, while in Mexico they are far higher than any earlier peak, though they have begun falling in recent days.
In Bolivia last summer, mortality figures reviewed by The New York Times suggested that the country’s real death toll was nearly five times the official tally, indicating that Bolivia had suffered one of the world’s worst epidemics. About 20,000 more people died from June through August than in past years, according to a Times analysis — a vast number in a country of about 11 million people.
Bolivia is now reporting an average of 60 coronavirus deaths per day, approaching the numbers from last summer. Experts believe the higher mortality rate is caused by the more contagious virus variants originating in neighboring Brazil and elsewhere, but they lack the instruments to analyze the virus’s genetic code.
Despite the rising death rate, the Bolivian authorities have not implemented the quarantine measures used to help curb the virus’s first wave a year ago. Officials in Bolivia and other Latin American nations are touting their nascent vaccination programs as a reason to avoid lockdowns, even though few countries in the region beyond Brazil have procured a meaningful number of doses.
Only 20,000 vaccine doses have arrived in Bolivia, although the government says it plans to vaccinate eight million people by September.
In other global developments:
More cases linked to a quarantine hotel in Victoria, Australia, were reported on Tuesday as an employee and returned traveler both tested positive for the virus. The traveler had completed her quarantine period, making her the second person this week to test positive after leaving a facility.
Starting next week, travelers who return to Britain from countries where variants of the virus are widespread will have to pay 1,750 pounds ($2,410) for a 10-day hotel quarantine, the authorities said on Tuesday. Those who lie about where they have been could face prison terms of up to 10 years, Britain’s health secretary, Matt Hancock, said. The list of affected countries include Portugal, as well as most of South America and southern Africa.
Britain’s Defense Ministry said that a “very small number” of its soldiers in Kenya had tested positive for the virus amid an outbreak at a training camp in the East African nation. The camp, about 120 miles north of the capital, Nairobi, has about 100 permanent employees and rotating personnel of 280, according to the British military. The base closed last year but reopened last month.
Anatoly Kurmanaev, María Silvia Trigo, Livia Albeck-Ripka, Elian Peltier and
Advertisement
An expansion of Alabama’s lagging Covid-19 vaccination program drew large crowds of people on Monday as the state opened the last of eight new sites for inoculations.
The centers are a huge expansion of a vaccination program that has struggled to gain traction. Only 7.7 percent of eligible Alabamians have gotten at least one vaccine dose, according to a New York Times database, placing the state last among the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
Long lines of cars formed outside a downtown stadium in Selma, a hospital parking deck in Dothan and the site of a former shopping mall in Montgomery, where teams of workers delivered vaccinations through car windows. Shots were available to anyone over 65 and to select groups that included educators, farm workers, grocery employees and state legislators.
Before the centers opened, only about 700,000 medical workers, emergency medical workers, nursing home residents and people 75 and over were eligible to be vaccinated. The opening of the eight centers coincided with an expansion of eligibility for vaccination that raised that total to about 1.5 million.
Each of the eight centers is equipped to give 5,000 vaccinations by week’s end. By comparison, workers at Southeast Health medical center in Dothan had vaccinated fewer than 4,700 people since vaccines first became available in late December, the hospital spokesman, Mark Stewart, said in an interview.
Mr. Stewart said thousands of applicants had already sought appointments in the Dothan area. About 900 vaccinations were to be given out by day’s end, he said.
See How the Vaccine Rollout Is Going in Your State
See where doses have gone, and who is eligible for a shot in each state.
As the pandemic persists around the world, every month about 130 billion disposable face masks are ending up in landfills, city streets, rivers, beaches and oceans — posing a stark risk to the environmental.
In a study published last week, Australian researchers proposed a potential solution: recycling the used face masks into roads.
“At the beginning of the pandemic, I wished I were a doctor,” said Mohammad Saberian, a civil engineer at RMIT University who is the paper’s lead author. Then he realized that he, too, had an urgent role to play: figuring out what to do with pandemic-generated detritus.
The paper, published in the journal Science of the Total Environment, looked at how face masks could be combined with other recycled construction materials to reduce waste from the pandemic while reducing reliance on other materials like plastic, which is often used as filler in roads. The researchers found that about three million masks could be put into a two-lane road of more than half a mile, and that those roads were likely to be stronger and more flexible than some made with nonrecycled materials.
“This research not only works, but it can also provide real engineering benefit,” Dr. Saberian said, adding that he hoped the next step would involve building a prototype of the road to fully test its functionality.
To conduct their experiment, researchers heated the masks to simulate disinfecting them. They then shredded the masks into strips and mixed them with recycled concrete. Eventually, the researchers were left with hard cylindrical samples, which they tested by applying weight, heat and moisture.
The project is not the first to recycle materials into roads, nor is it the first to consider what to do with the masses of discarded personal protective equipment, the production of which has surged since last year. Companies such as TerraCycle, which collect personal protective equipment from homes and businesses, have also grown in popularity in recent months.
“We’ve seen spikes in single-used consumption all over the place, and this technology shows a path for using these materials,” said Jonathan Krones, an industrial ecologist at Boston College who was not involved in the study.
He and other scientists said, however, that better solutions involved reducing consumption and the manufacturing of disposable materials, even in a pandemic. “What I really want to see happening is us divorcing ourselves from this idea that disposability equals sanitation,” Dr. Krones said.
“It’s so good to see people.”
That was Naomi Osaka, the three-time Grand Slam champion, moments after her first-round win on Monday afternoon at the Australian Open. She stood at a microphone on the court at Rod Laver Arena and peered up at a crowd that seemed, if not normal, then something like it.
That was how it was on Monday across the grounds of Melbourne Park, where international sports returned, however temporarily, to something like it was before the pandemic.
Spectators lined up for tickets. They waited in security lines, pondered whether to order burgers or fish and chips, and decided how many $13 beers they could stomach.
The tournament could safely occur now only because the Grand Slam tennis season happens to start in a country that has arguably controlled Covid-19 better than anywhere else, thanks to months of enforced lockdowns, closed borders, and thorough testing and contact tracing. Just 909 people in Australia, which has a population of more than 25 million, have died of Covid-19. The country has averaged a half-dozen cases a day during the past two weeks, nearly all of them international arrivals.
Compromises have been made at this year’s event: Spectators are capped at 30,000 per day, about half the number that would usually attend. But their roars were appreciated more than ever.
“That’s one of the biggest motivations that we have, the source where we draw our energy and strength and motivation,” said Novak Djokovic, the world No. 1. “Especially at my age and stage of my career, I’m looking to feed off that energy from the crowd.”"
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "Big oil companies endured one of their worst second quarters ever and are positioning themselves for prolonged pain as the coronavirus pandemic continues to sap global demand for fossil fuels.
Exxon Mobil Corp. posted a quarterly loss for the second straight quarter for the first time this century on Friday, reporting a loss of $1.1 billion, compared with a profit of $3.1 billion a year ago. Exxon, the largest U.S. oil company, hadn’t reported back-to-back losses for at least 22 years, according to Dow Jones Market Data, whose figures extend to 1998.
“The global pandemic and oversupply conditions significantly impacted our second-quarter financial results with lower prices, margins, and sales volumes,” Exxon Chief Executive Darren Woods said.
Chevron Corp. said Friday it lost $8.3 billion in the second quarter, down from $4.3 billion in profits during the same period last year, its largest loss since at least 1998. It wrote down $5.7 billion in oil-and-gas properties, including $2.6 billion in Venezuela, citing uncertainty in the country ruled by strongman Nicolás Maduro. Chevron also said it lowered its internal estimates for future commodity prices.
Royal Dutch Shell PLC and Total SA reported significant losses in the second quarter earlier this week, as the impact of the pandemic and a worsening long-term outlook for commodity prices spurred them to write down the value of their assets.
Newsletter Sign-up
The 10-Point.
A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal.
The dismal results are ratcheting up the problems for the oil giants, which were struggling to attract investors even before the pandemic, as concerns over climate-change regulations and increasing competition from renewable energy and electric vehicles cloud the future for fossil fuels.
Holdings of oil-and-gas stocks by active money managers are at a 15-year low, according to investment bank Evercore ISI. BP PLC, Shell and Total are all trading at 30-year lows relative to the overall S&P 500. Exxon is trading at its lowest level to the S&P 500 since 1977, according to the bank.
Many of the big oil companies have sought to retain investors despite slowing growth and profits over the past decade by paying out hefty dividends, but those payouts are proving hard to sustain during the pandemic.
STAY INFORMED
Get a coronavirus briefing six days a week, and a weekly Health newsletter once the crisis abates: Sign up here.
Crude prices have stabilized at around $40 a barrel, providing modest relief for the industry after U.S. oil prices briefly turned negative for the first time ever in April. But none of the world’s largest oil companies now foresee a rapid recovery as countries continue to struggle with containing the coronavirus.
Chevron CEO Mike Wirth said his company faced an uncertain future for energy demand and couldn’t predict commodity prices with confidence right now.
“We expect a choppy economy and a choppy market,” Mr. Wirth said in an interview earlier in July. “It all depends on the virus and the policies enacted to respond to it.”
Oil and gas production by both Exxon and Chevron decreased in the quarter, down 7% and 3%, respectively, from a year ago, as the companies shut off wells to avoid selling into a weak market. Exxon’s production-and-exploration business lost $1.7 billion, which Exxon attributed to lower commodity prices. Chevron’s production unit lost $6.1 billion.
U.S. oil prices closed below $40 per barrel Thursday for the first time in three weeks.
For the entire second quarter, U.S. oil prices averaged $28 per barrel and Brent crude averaged about $33, according to Dow Jones Market Data, prices at which even the largest oil companies struggle to turn a profit, analysts say.
While major stock indexes have recovered from April, when they fell to their lowest levels in years, oil and gas stocks have continued to lag despite the slight rebound in commodity prices.
Many of the world’s largest energy companies, including Exxon and Chevron, have for years used an integrated business model, which has historically allowed them to weather most market conditions.
By owning oil and gas wells, along with the downstream plants to manufacture refined products like gasoline and chemicals, the companies were long able to capitalize in one sector of their business, regardless of whether oil prices were high or low.
But that model has failed to deliver strong returns for most of the past decade, as the world has faced a glut of fossil fuels triggered in part by America’s fracking boom, and it isn’t protecting the companies now, according to Evercore ISI analyst Doug Terreson.
“A broad-based reassessment of the capital-management programs at the big oils is required at this point,” Mr. Terreson said.
Oil companies have been forced to take dramatic action to shore up their finances in recent months, including cutting tens of billions of dollars from their budgets and laying off thousands of employees.
Exxon, which had previously disclosed a 30% cut to capital expenditures in 2020, said on Friday it has “identified significant potential for additional reductions” and said capital spending in 2021 will be lower than this year’s spending.
Its steepest cuts have been to U.S. shale drilling, particularly in the Permian Basin, the most active U.S. oil field, where it removed half of its drilling rigs and will cut half of the remaining 30 rigs by the end of year. Chevron is operating just four rigs in the Permian and said production there would decline around 7% this year.
Shell in April cut its dividend for the first time since World War II to avoid having to borrow to fund it. It reported a second-quarter loss of $18.4 billion on Thursday, which included a $16.8 billion write-down, while French giant Total posted an $8.4 billion loss including an $8.1 billion write-down. Both companies report net income attributable to shareholders, a proxy for net profits. BP reports Tuesday.
Excluding impairments, Shell and Total actually turned a profit during the quarter as their trading units helped stave off even larger losses.
Exxon and Chevron have promised they will maintain their dividends, viewed by many investors as the most attractive part of owning their stocks. Some analysts predict Exxon may be forced to cut its dividend in 2021 if market conditions don’t recover.
Exxon’s dividend payments cost the company almost $15 billion a year. The company’s debt grew by $8.8 billion in the quarter, according to Goldman Sach Group Inc., which said Exxon will need oil prices around $75 per barrel in 2021 to cover its dividend payments from cash flow. Exxon said Friday it wouldn’t take on additional debt.
Dan Pickering, chief investment officer of energy investment firm Pickering Energy Partners LP, said the industry can survive at $40 oil but needs significantly higher prices to thrive. According to Mr. Pickering, who said he holds small positions in Exxon and Chevron, oil companies will have to continue cost-cutting for the foreseeable future.
“You’ve got to assume that this is the world we’re going to be in, Mr. Pickering said. “And, if this is the world we’re going to be in, the cost structure is too high.”
Dave Sebastian contributed to this article.
Write to Christopher M. Matthews at christopher.matthews@wsj.com
Continue reading your article with
a WSJ membership
Already a member? Sign In
- Walmart:
Black Friday Deals for Days
- Hotels.com:
Hotels.com November 2022 Deals: Save 20% or more!
- Best Buy:
Save 15% or more on the Best Buy deal of the Day
- Expedia:
Today's Expedia promo code: Extra 10% off your stay
- SHEIN:
Extra 15% off - SHEIN coupon code
- Journeys:
Journeys: Save up to 45% on men’s and women's items"
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "Daily Business Briefing
Oil prices approached $100 a barrel on Tuesday, the highest in more than seven years, and European gas futures briefly jumped more than 13 percent, amid rising concerns over armed conflict in Ukraine after the Kremlin ordered Russian troops into separatist territories late Monday.
The price of Brent crude, the international benchmark, rose 4 percent, to about $99 a barrel. West Texas Intermediate was trading at about $95 a barrel, up about 5 percent.
European natural gas futures are especially sensitive to the latest news, because Russia provides more than a third of Europe's supply, with some of it running through pipelines in Ukraine. Dutch front-month gas futures jumped 13.8 percent when trading started on Tuesday, then eased a bit to about 78 euros a megawatt-hour, up more than 7 percent.
After oil prices spent a week more or less flat, uncertainty has gripped the markets in recent days. Prices went higher on Sunday as more troops massed at Ukraine’s border, then fell again as diplomatic solutions seemed more plausible.
An invasion could interrupt Russian natural gas and oil shipments to parts of Europe and then be followed by a decline in purchases of Russian energy by the West. Russia produces about 10 percent of world oil supplies and, in recent years, about one-third of Europe’s gas. In the event of significant hostilities, the United States and many other industrialized countries would likely consider releasing millions of barrels of oil from their strategic reserves.
There is also talk in Washington of suspending federal taxes on gasoline, which could help restrain prices at the pump, at least for a short time.
The average national price of a gallon of gasoline rose nearly 4 cents over the last week to $3.53, roughly 90 cents higher than a year ago. Gasoline prices at the pump usually follow global oil price trends by a week or two.
Global markets tumbled on Tuesday after Russia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin, ordered troops into two breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine late on Monday.
Oil prices jumped higher, while stock indexes around the world declined. The Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.6 percent, its fourth consecutive day of losses. Earlier, it had fallen nearly 2 percent. Futures pointed to a 1.1 percent decline in the S&P 500 when markets start trading later on Tuesday. (U.S. markets were closed on Monday for the Presidents’ Day holiday.)
In a speech on Monday, Mr. Putin said that Ukraine was a “country created by Russia,” and he signed a decree recognizing the independence of the breakaway regions, Donetsk and Luhansk, before sending in troops. European and American leaders have said that they will impose further sanctions in response.
The MOEX, Russia’s benchmark stock index, dropped more than 5 percent on Tuesday, following a 10.5 percent plunge the previous day, which was the worst single-day drop since March 2014, during the annexation of Crimea.
Government bond yields fell as traders sought the safety of Treasuries. The 10-year yield on U.S. Treasury notes declined two basis points, or 0.02 percentage points, to 1.90 percent. The potential global economic ramifications of the conflict in Ukraine have pulled down benchmark U.S. bond yields, which about a week ago were at their highest since mid-2019 as traders prepared for the Federal Reserve to begin raising interest rates to tackle inflation.
A war between Ukraine and Russia is likely to disrupt global supply chains of commodities, causing food and energy costs to rise and increasing the risk of a prolonged period of faster inflation. Russia is the world’s largest supplier of wheat and is a critical source of energy for Europe, providing nearly 40 percent of the continent’s natural gas and 25 percent of its oil. An extended conflict could worsen Europe’s already high energy bills.
Futures of Brent crude, the European benchmark, rose nearly 4 percent to about $99 a barrel.
Asian stock markets closed lower. The Hang Seng Index in Hong Kong fell 2.7 percent, its worst day since July, and the Nikkei 225 in Japan dropped 1.7 percent.
Monday
Presidents’ Day: Stock and bond markets in the United States will be closed.
Tuesday
Macy’s earnings: The beleaguered chain will report its financial results for the final three months of 2021 and for the full year. It raised its forecasts in November after reporting better-than-expected third-quarter results, but retail sales fell in December during the all-important holiday shopping season.
Home Depot earnings: The finances and outlook for Home Depot often can provide some insight into the housing market. Prices for housing materials have remained high, which has depressed home construction. But Home Depot said in November that it was seeing an uptick in sales to contractors as Americans felt more comfortable allowing outsiders into their homes again. Lowe’s will report on Wednesday.
Wednesday
Starbucks union vote: The National Labor Relations Board is expected to tally the results of a unionization vote at three Starbucks stores in the Buffalo area. Since employees at three other stores in the area began union campaigns last year, employees of at least 15 more stores around the country have filed petitions for union elections. Workers at a store in Mesa, Ariz., are also awaiting the results of an election.
Thursday
New home sales: Demand for new homes remains strong, but snarled supply chains are expected to continue to hinder availability. Housing starts fell in January, but housing permits rose, suggesting an upbeat sentiment among builders.
Discovery earnings: A deal to combine Discovery and WarnerMedia cleared a major regulatory hurdle this month, but the media company would inherit tensions arising from the resignation of the longtime president of CNN, Jeff Zucker, who stepped down at the behest of Jason Kilar, WarnerMedia’s chief executive.
Coinbase earnings: The firm’s market debut last year was greeted as a big step toward wider acceptance of digital currencies, but its shares have tumbled 50 percent from their first day of trading, rocked by a turbulent cryptocurrency market.
Friday
Inflation report: Economists expect the Personal Consumption Expenditures index, the measure of inflation preferred by the Federal Reserve, to show that prices rose 6 percent in January from a year earlier, up from 5.8 percent in December. That would continue the fastest pace of inflation since 1982. Policymakers at the central bank have been preparing to raise interest rates as they shift their focus to fighting persistently high inflation."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "New State Jobless Claims Surge as Employers Shed Jobs: Live Updates
American employers continue to shed workers at a staggering rate as a resurgent coronavirus and the absence of new federal aid take a toll on economic growth.
The Labor Department reported Thursday that 886,000 Americans filed new claims for unemployment benefits last week, an increase of nearly 77,000 from the previous week. Adjusted for seasonal variations, the total was 898,000.
After dropping in late spring and early summer as pandemic-related lockdowns eased, new claims for state jobless benefits had been steadily totaling about 800,000 a week.
“It’s discouraging,” said Ian Shepherdson, chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics. “We’re still stuck at a level of claims that’s far higher than it was during the worst of what followed the crash of 2008. The labor market appears to be stalled, which underscores the need for new stimulus as quickly as possible.”
New claims for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, an emergency federal program that covers freelancers, self-employed workers, part-timers and others who don’t qualify for benefits under the regular unemployment system, were tallied at 373,000, down from 474,000. Most of the decline reflected an aberration in Arizona, which has been dealing with fraud issues in the program and reported no new claims.
The data do not include fresh figures for California, which has temporarily stopped accepting new unemployment applications to address a huge processing backlog and weed out fraud. Instead, the report incorporated the last weekly figures available.
The lack of fresh data from California makes it difficult to draw firm conclusions, but the latest numbers “point to a lot of churn in the labor market, and it appears the rate of firings has picked up,” said Michael Gapen, chief U.S. economist at Barclays.
Over the past month, large employers including United Airlines, Disney and Allstate announced tens of thousands of layoffs, and more are expected as sectors like leisure and hospitality struggle. In some states, restaurants have salvaged some business by serving diners outside, but many will lose that option as temperatures fall.
Despite the widespread economic pain, Republicans and Democrats in Washington have been unable to agree on a new relief package, a failure that may cause the economy to slow further in the coming months. Federal benefits created in March to supplement state payments to the unemployed are set to expire by the end of the year.
Steven Mnuchin says he will back the Democrats’ testing proposal, but hurdles remain in reaching a deal.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said on Thursday that the White House was willing to make additional concessions to Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California in hopes of rekindling a stimulus deal before the election.
Speaking on CNBC, the Treasury secretary said that he would agree to the language that Democrats had insisted on when it came to a coronavirus testing program and noted that the two sides had already agreed to spend an additional $75 billion on testing and contact tracing. The specifics of such a program have been an obstacle in the talks.
“We’ll fundamentally agree with their testing language, subject to some minor issues,” Mr. Mnuchin said. “We need to get money to the American public now.”
The Treasury secretary is expected to speak to Ms. Pelosi later on Thursday.
Mr. Mnuchin’s remarks came after the Labor Department reported that the number of new claims for unemployment benefits jumped to 886,000 last week.
But significant hurdles remain in reaching a deal, including Republican resistance to what the White House is willing to support. On Wednesday, Mr. Mnuchin acknowledged it would be difficult to pass and enact a deal in the next three weeks.
In the interview on CNBC, Mr. Mnuchin did not directly address the lack of support for a bill by Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, suggesting that he has been briefed on negotiations between the White House and House Democrats while acknowledging that Senate Republicans prefer a more “targeted” relief bill.
Negotiators have been locked in fruitless talks for months. On Thursday, Mr. Mnuchin assailed Democrats for letting politics get in the way of reaching agreement before the election, though President Trump scuttled the talks himself when he said in a tweet last week that he had called off stimulus negotiations until after the election. The majority of Senate Republicans have also warned that they cannot accept the latest $1.8 trillion framework Mr. Mnuchin has put forward, even as Ms. Pelosi insists that plan is inadequate.
Mr. Mnuchin also called on Congress to give him the authority to repurpose approximately $300 billion in unused relief money from the legislation that was passed in March. He said he could begin getting that money into the economy this week.
Advertisement
More and more Americans are relying on a federal program designed to help the jobless as state unemployment benefits run out.
The program, Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Compensation, was created by Congress in March to provide 13 weeks of aid when regular state unemployment benefits expire — typically after 26 weeks.
It has now been more than 30 weeks since unemployment claims spiked in March, when the pandemic first forced the economy into lockdown mode, so millions of unemployed Americans are starting to qualify for the extended benefits.
But getting on the rolls isn’t easy, experts say. “The transition from regular state benefits to P.E.U.C. is not going smoothly,” said Heidi Shierholz, senior economist and director of policy at the Economic Policy Institute, a left-leaning research group.
In some places, recipients of state unemployment benefits haven’t been notified of their eligibility for the federal extension, and aging computer systems have slowed the processing of applications.
Still, in the week that ended Sept. 26, the most recent period with available data, nearly 2.8 million people were getting Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Compensation benefits, a jump from fewer than two million the previous week. That increase was roughly equal to the decline in the number collecting state benefits.
The federal program is set to expire at the end of the year, and if it is not extended by Congress, “we’re going to see a disaster,” Ms. Shierholz said. “There will be a huge drop in living standards and an increase in poverty as well as downward pressure on economic growth.”
For those who qualify, the program has helped as they search for work.
Jared Gaxiola of Torrance, Calif., was laid off from his job as a freelance lighting technician in March, after live events were canceled across the country.
When Mr. Gaxiola’s state benefits ran out in mid-September, he was able to get a 13-week extension through Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Compensation.
Mr. Gaxiola, 35, hopes to find a job by the time the payments run out again in December. But with entertainment work still scarce, he worries about how he will pay his rent in the new year.
“I could probably borrow money from my sister if I needed to,” Mr. Gaxiola said. “But I really don’t want to have to do that.”
— Nelson D. Schwartz and
Before the pandemic struck, Chloe Ezi was a lifeguard at a public aquatic center in Powder Springs, Ga. It was part-time work, at $11 an hour, but she was able to bring in an extra $300 a week by teaching private swim lessons.
In March, Ms. Ezi was sent home for three months when the aquatic center closed during coronavirus lockdowns. Because she continued to be paid half her wages — about $75 a week — the pool told her that she was not eligible to file for unemployment benefits.
Ms. Ezi, 19, was called back to work in May, but because virus restrictions kept her from teaching private swim lessons, she was able to bring in only about $150 a week — barely enough to cover her $280 monthly car insurance bill, her $80 cellphone bill, and $100 monthly payments to Penn Foster College, where she is completing a dental assistant certificate program, plus groceries and other necessities.
“That’s not a lot to live off of,” Ms. Ezi said. “I was zeroing out my paycheck every month.”
To save money, Ms. Ezi lived with her boyfriend in his parents’ house.
“We’re all just a big family living in this house together,” she said. “It can get pretty stressful living with so many people like this.”
Tired of living in such close quarters, Ms. Ezi began looking for a job that would pay more. In August, she found a full-time position as a sales representative at a store that sells birding equipment, where she makes $13 an hour plus tips. She remains on the staff at the pool, where she still picks up an occasional shift.
Now she and her boyfriend can afford to rent a one-bedroom apartment in Smyrna, Ga. They moved in on Wednesday.
“My new job allowed us to finally get our own place,” she said. “I’m feeling pretty proud of myself right now.”
For three years, Lea Polizzi worked more than 50 hours a week as a nanny and a freelance photographer in New York City. But in March, when the pandemic hit, the family she worked for on the Upper East Side left the city, and all of her photography gigs dried up.
Ms. Polizzi, 24, filed for unemployment benefits and started receiving about $200 a week from the state, as well as a $600 federal supplement. Those payments enabled her to meet expenses — including the $1,100 rent for her apartment in the Bushwick neighborhood of Brooklyn — while she looked for a job.
But the $600 payments expired at the end of July. Since then, Ms. Polizzi has used about 75 percent of her savings — roughly $4,000 — to pay bills.
“That was the money I had saved to use for vacations or emergency funds,” Ms. Polizzi said. “I was going to buy a new camera. And then as soon as everything started going down, I had to put everything on hold, because I knew that I was going to end up having to pay rent with it eventually.”
Ms. Polizzi recently received $900 from Lost Wages Assistance, a short-term supplement from the federal government, and she expects one more payment from the program in the next few weeks.
In the meantime, she has taken matters into her own hands. She is making masks, lingerie, hats and jewelry and selling the items online at $25 to $200 apiece.
She has made about 60 sales. “Hopefully, I’ll be able to make it work and just pay all my bills through my art ventures,” she said.
Advertisement
Stocks fell on Thursday, as earnings reports and new economic data reminded investors of the challenges that companies and workers face amid a second wave of coronavirus cases. New restrictions were imposed in London after a curfew in Paris and other French cities.
Share prices for airlines and hospitality companies, already battered this year, fell as the tightening European rules cast a shadow over travel and spending in the coming holiday season.
On Wall Street, the S&P 500 dropped more than 1 percent at the start of trading, on track for its third consecutive daily decline, before recovering some ground. The drop in European markets was steeper, with the Stoxx 600 Europe and Britain’s FTSE 100 down more than 2 percent.
It didn’t seem to help that Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said on Thursday that the White House was willing to make additional concessions to Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California in hopes of rekindling a stimulus deal before the election. Mr. Mnuchin had dampened sentiment in the markets Wednesday by cautioning that he didn’t expect a relief package before the Nov. 3 election.
Mr. Mnuchin’s comments came as data from the Labor Department showed that new state unemployment claims jumped last week to nearly 900,000, a figure that highlights the fact that employers continue to shed workers at a staggering rate.
The slide in markets on Thursday is “linked to spikes in coronavirus cases and fears that regional lockdowns will subdue the economic recovery,” said Susannah Streeter, an analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown. “We are seeing fresh losses for airlines and travel stocks.”
Shares of European airlines, Lufthansa and easyJet, fell sharply. Ryanair tumbled after saying it would fly only 40 percent of its usual capacity this winter, down from previous plans for 60 percent.
On Wall Street, United Airlines dropped after the company said it lost $1.8 billion in the three months through September. Marriott International, MGM Resorts and other travel and tourism stocks were also lower.
— Eshe Nelson and
On the afternoon of Feb. 24, President Trump declared on Twitter that the coronavirus was “very much under control” in the United States, but hours earlier, senior members of the president’s economic team, privately addressing board members of the conservative Hoover Institution, were less confident.
Tomas J. Philipson, a senior economic adviser to the president, told the group he could not yet estimate the effects of the virus on the American economy. To some in the group, the implication was that an outbreak could prove worse than Mr. Philipson and other Trump administration advisers were signaling in public at the time.
The next day, board members — many of them Republican donors — got another taste of government uncertainty from Larry Kudlow, the director of the National Economic Council. Hours after he had boasted on CNBC that the virus was contained in the United States and “it’s pretty close to airtight,” Mr. Kudlow delivered a more ambiguous private message. He asserted that the virus was “contained in the U.S., to date, but now we just don’t know,” according to a document describing the sessions obtained by The New York Times.
The document, written by a hedge fund consultant who attended the three-day gathering of Hoover’s board, was stark. “What struck me,” the consultant wrote, was that nearly every official he heard from raised the virus “as a point of concern, totally unprovoked.”
The consultant’s assessment quickly spread through parts of the investment world. U.S. stocks were already spiraling because of a warning from a federal public health official that the virus was likely to spread, but traders spotted the immediate significance: The president’s aides appeared to be giving wealthy party donors an early warning of a potentially impactful contagion at a time when Mr. Trump was publicly insisting that the threat was nonexistent.
Interviews with eight people who either received copies of the memo or were briefed on aspects of it as it spread among investors in New York and elsewhere provide a glimpse of how elite traders had access to information from the administration that helped them gain financial advantage during a chaotic three days when global markets were teetering.
To many of the investors who received or heard about the memo, it was the first significant sign of skepticism among Trump administration officials about their ability to contain the virus. It also provided a hint of the fallout that was to come, said one major investor who was briefed on it: the upending of daily life for the entire country.
“Short everything,” was the reaction of the investor, using the Wall Street term for betting on the idea that the stock prices of companies would soon fall.
— Kate Kelly and
Americans used one-time stimulus checks they received from the federal government early in the pandemic to pad their savings accounts and pay off debt, new research from the Federal Reserve shows.
Households spent just 29 percent of the money they received earlier this year, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York said in a post on its website, citing its Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted in June and August. Another 36 percent of the cash was saved, while 35 percent was used to pay down debt.
Americans adults who qualified for the stimulus received up to $1,200 each, with an extra $500 added per child in the household. Out of the Fed’s sample, 89 percent of households received money.
Poorer families and those who lost jobs or income amid the pandemic were more likely to use their money to pay down debts, while richer families saved the money.
“The economic impact payments, by increasing both household income and the debt pay down, contributed importantly to the sharp increase in the overall saving rate during the early months of the pandemic,” the central bank’s researchers wrote in the post.
Several factors might have been behind the relatively low spending and high saving. People were unsure when the economic crisis would clear up, the researchers wrote, and might have been acting cautiously. They were on lockdown, which might have limited opportunities to spend, and some rent payments — which count as consumption — were delayed.
The trends seem unlikely to change if new aid becomes available: In the August survey, the New York Fed asked what households might do if they received another $1,500 check. Respondents expect to spend even less of that money, about 24 percent.
The newfound savings buffer cushioned the blow as expanded unemployment insurance expired. Consumer spending has held up even though millions remain unemployed but are no longer receiving an extra $600 per week from the federal government.
“We’re still benefiting from the stimulus,” Randal K. Quarles, vice chair for supervision at the Fed, said during an event on Wednesday, noting that it makes it harder to guess what will happen to the economy once that tailwind fades.
Advertisement
Morgan Stanley was the latest Wall Street bank to report a jump in earnings for the three months through September, helped in large part by an upswing in trading revenue.
Profit rose 25 percent to $2.72 billion over the same period last year, the bank said on Thursday. Revenue rose 16 percent to $11.66 billion.
As U.S. markets rallied during the quarter, revenue from the bank’s trading business rose 19 percent from the same period last year. Gains from loans held for sale as part of Morgan Stanley’s corporate lending activity also rose substantially.
Still, in what could be interpreted as a sign of optimism over the health of the corporate economy, Morgan Stanley’s provision for credit losses on loans and lending commitments was less than half of what it was in the previous quarter.
Morgan Stanley’s chief executive, James P. Gorman, said in a statement that the quarter was characterized by “consistent, high returns.” He predicted that the completion of his bank’s acquisition of the trading company E*TRADE and its recently announced purchase of Eaton Vance would position Morgan Stanley well for future growth.
Poverty has returned to levels higher than before the coronavirus crisis, two new studies have found. The number of poor people has grown by eight million since May, according to researchers at Columbia University, after falling by four million at the beginning of the pandemic as a result of the $2 trillion emergency package known as the Cares Act. Using a different definition of poverty, researchers from the University of Chicago and Notre Dame found that poverty has grown by six million people in the past three months, with circumstances worsening most for Black people and children.
Shares in Big Hit, the management company behind the Korean boy band BTS, skyrocketed on their first day of trading in South Korea on Thursday, as investors rushed to get a piece of one of the world’s biggest musical acts. The stock opened at 270,000 won, or about $235, double the company’s offering price of 135,000 won, and was up 30 percent, the daily limit, in early trading. By day’s end, the stock was down over 4 percent from its opening price, with the company’s value settling at around 8.7 trillion won, or about $7.6 billion, by the market’s close.
Wells Fargo has found evidence that some employees filed fraudulent applications to get money from a Small Business Administration relief program supporting companies dealing with coronavirus lockdowns, according to an internal memo. The memo said the employees had created fake profiles to file for money from the Economic Injury Disaster Loan program. “We have terminated the employment of those individuals and will cooperate fully with law enforcement,” the bank’s head of human resources, David Galloreese, wrote in the memo, which was posted on an internal website on Wednesday.
United Airlines lost $1.8 billion in the three months through September, with operating revenue down 78 percent compared with the same period in 2019. The airline said it ended September with more than $19 billion in cash and other available liquidity, boosted by a large debt offering backed by its mileage program and the ability to borrow $5.2 billion from the Treasury Department."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "American unemployment benefits claims remain at a 17-year record low, according to new data released on Thursday from by the U.S. Department of Labor.
American workers filed 245,000 claims for state unemployment benefits during the week that ended on December 23, according to seasonally adjusted jobless statistics published on Thursday.
Since mid-October, unemployment claims have ranged 223,000 to 252,000 workers.
The American economy reached its 147th straight week that unemployment claims dipped below 300,000, which marks the longest unemployment streak since 1970.
The unemployment rate has reached a 17-year low at 4.1 percent as the economy added 228,000 jobs in November, more than double the roughly 100,000 jobs per month needed to keep up with the growth in the working-age population.
The growing economy encouraged the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates this month for the third time year. The country’s central bank signaled that it plans to raise rates three times next year.
American consumer sentiment reached its highest level since 2000, according to the University of Michigan.
Retail sales also boomed 4.9 percent over the previous holiday shopping season.
Several other American corporations announced that they will also invest in their employees, give their workers bonuses and wage hikes, and invest in America.
Comcast announced after the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act passed in December that they will distribute $1,000 bonuses to more than one hundred thousand frontline and non-executive employees and invest more than $50 billion in infrastructure over the next several years as a result of Republicans passing tax reform.
Fellow bank Wells Fargo also revealed that they will raise their staff minimum wage to $15 an hour and would also target $400 million in donations to community and non-profit organizations next year thanks to the Republican tax bill.
AT&T announced that they will distribute more $1,000 bonuses to more than 200,000 of their employees and invest more than $1 billion next year in their domestic business.
President Donald Trump tweeted on Thursday, “Retail sales are at record numbers. We’ve got the economy going better than anyone ever dreamt – and you haven’t seen anything yet!”
Retail sales are at record numbers. We’ve got the economy going better than anyone ever dreamt – and you haven’t seen anything yet!
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) December 28, 2017
Comment count on this article reflects comments made on Breitbart.com and Facebook. Visit Breitbart's Facebook Page."
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "Unemployment Claims to Remain Historically High
Weekly report will likely show pandemic continues to batter labor market
The number of Americans applying for unemployment benefits likely held above pre-pandemic highs last week, a sign the labor market is still being battered by the novel coronavirus’s effects.
Economists expect applications for jobless benefits—seen as a proxy for layoffs—ticked down to 825,000 last week from 837,000 a week earlier. Weekly jobless claims are down sharply from a peak of nearly seven million in March but have clocked in at between 800,000 and 900,000 for more than a month. Claims remain above the pre-pandemic high of 695,000.
“It’s more of the same, but it’s also still jaw-dropping that we have that many new claims even now, as we’re six, seven months into this whole recession and recovery,” said Eliza Forsythe, an economics professor at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
The number of people collecting unemployment benefits through regular state programs, which cover most workers, fell to 11.8 million in the week ended Sept. 19 from 12.7 million the prior week, according to the Labor Department. A decline in so-called continuing claims indicates many unemployed people are returning to work.
But some of the drop in continuing claims represents individuals who have exhausted the maximum duration of payments available through regular state programs and are now collecting money through a federal program that provides an extra 13 weeks of benefits. About 1.8 million people were receiving aid through this extended-benefits program in the week ended Sept. 12, up from 1.6 million a week earlier, Labor Department data show.
Large corporations announced job cuts last week, including American Airlines Group Inc., United Airlines Holdings Inc., and Walt Disney Co. Many of those workers will likely seek unemployment benefits in the coming weeks.
The labor market and economy more broadly are flashing signs of a slowdown. Monthly job gains and job postings have cooled, and more layoffs are becoming permanent. Household income fell at the end of summer because of a drop in federal supplements to jobless benefits, and consumer spending is also growing more slowly.
Leland Lambert, age 38, of Salt Lake City, was laid off in June from his job as an operations director at a day-care center when the nonprofit exhausted federal aid through the Paycheck Protection Program, which was designed to keep workers on payrolls.
As soon as he was laid off, the Utah resident slashed spending on nonessentials like soda and Netflix and applied for jobless benefits. Mr. Lambert is collecting regular state unemployment benefits of about $550 a week while searching for a new job. But his outlook for finding work is bleak after having applied for more than 100 jobs since June in roles such as operations management and business consulting.
“There are a ton of unemployed, and the jobs just aren’t quite there yet,” Mr. Lambert said. “Especially in the upper-management side, the competition is pretty tough.”
He decided to pursue an online master’s degree program in management and leadership while continuing to seek employment. He expects it will be several more months before a job comes his way.
Millions of workers are receiving jobless benefits through a federal pandemic program for the self-employed, gig workers and others not typically eligible for unemployment aid. In the week ended Sept. 12, 11.8 million individuals were seeking benefits through this program.
Many economists are skeptical about the accuracy of the pandemic claims figures, though. The pandemic unemployment program has been subject to fraud, as it is more difficult for state labor departments to verify incomes of self-employed people and gig workers than regular employees, Ms. Forsythe noted.
Congress also passed legislation this spring authorizing federal funding for an additional $600 in unemployment benefits. After those benefits expired, President Trump signed an executive order in August to replace them with an additional $300. States were authorized to tap $44 billion in disaster-relief funds to pay up to six weeks of benefits from the week ended Aug. 1.
On Tuesday, President Trump halted negotiations with Democrats on a larger coronavirus relief package until after the election, reducing the likelihood of further federal unemployment aid in the near term.
Write to Sarah Chaney at sarah.chaney@wsj.com
Copyright ©2020 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "The tendrils of the coronavirus pandemic reached deeper into the American economy last week, leaving millions more people out of work as the damage spread to jobs and industries that were spared at the outset of the crisis.
More than 6.6 million people filed new claims for unemployment benefits last week, the Labor Department said Thursday, setting a grim record for the second straight week.
The latest claims brought the two-week total to nearly 10 million.
The speed and scale of the job losses is without precedent. Until last month, the worst week for unemployment filings was 695,000 in 1982. By shuttering businesses and forcing vast layoffs, the coronavirus outbreak has in two weeks wiped out more jobs than the worst months of the last recession.
“What usually takes months or quarters to happen in a recession is happening in a matter of weeks,” said Michelle Meyer, chief U.S. economist for Bank of America Merrill Lynch.
7
million
6,648,000
Claims were filed last week
6
Initial jobless claims, per week
Seasonally adjusted
5
4
The week before was revised
up 24,000 to 3,307,000
3
RECESSION
2
1
0
’04
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
7
million
6,648,000
Claims were filed last week
6
Initial jobless claims, per week
5
Seasonally adjusted
4
The week before was revised
up 24,000 to 3,307,000
3
RECESSION
2
1
0
’04
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
7
million
6,648,000
Claims were filed last week
6
Initial jobless claims, per week
5
Seasonally adjusted
4
The week before was revised
up 24,000 to 3,307,000
3
RECESSION
2
1
0
’04
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
7
million
6,648,000
Claims were filed last week
6
5
Initial jobless claims, per week
4
Seasonally adjusted
The week before was revised
up 24,000 to 3,307,000
3
RECESSION
2
1
0
’04
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
The economic damage from the pandemic was initially concentrated in tourism, hospitality and related industries. But now the pain is spreading much more widely. The Institute for Supply Management said Wednesday that the manufacturing sector, which had recently begun to recover from last year’s trade war, was contracting again. Data from the employment site ZipRecruiter shows a steep drop in job postings even in industries usually insulated from recessions, like education and health care.
Law firms, technology start-ups and other white-collar employers that were initially able to keep workers on payroll and let them work from home are now laying people off as revenue dries up.
Even ZipRecruiter isn’t immune — the company cut hundreds of jobs this week as the steep drop in job postings cut into its business.
“People are being way too sanguine about a lot of the white-collar industries,” said Martha Gimbel, an economist and labor market expert at Schmidt Futures, a philanthropic initiative. “This thing is going to come for us all.”
Erica Battle, an education consultant in Nashville, figured her industry was as close to recession-proof as any — no matter how bad the economy, schools stay open. But as schools moved to online learning because of the virus, business began to dry up. Then, on March 16, as she was preparing for a weeklong consulting trip to Alabama and Texas, she got a call: The gigs were canceled.
“It was like, this is unbelievable, this is not really happening,” Ms. Battle said. “I’m going to wake up and I’m going to have to catch a flight.”
April was meant to be one of her busiest months, as schools rush to get students ready for standardized testing season. Instead, she is home with her husband and teenage son, trying to figure out how to cut expenses. They have gotten their bank to defer this month’s mortgage payment. Ms. Battle’s husband, a substance abuse counselor, still has a job, but they aren’t sure how long that will last.
“When you have to think about paying for groceries or for therapy, which one are you going to do?” Ms. Battle said.
Economists have warned that those sorts of choices — groceries or therapy? — could turn an acute economic crisis into a long recession. If laid-off workers can’t pay their bills, there could be a cascade of further layoffs and business failures. The greater the damage, the less chance of a quick economic rebound once the health crisis eases.
“The deeper the layoffs get, the longer the recovery will take,” said Julia Pollak, a labor economist for ZipRecruiter.
The $2 trillion emergency outlay by Congress last week was meant, in part, to prevent that cascade. The government will provide businesses with low-interest loans — which in some cases could turn into grants — to help them avoid layoffs and keep the lights on. And the law temporarily expanded the unemployment insurance system to cover more workers and offer them more generous benefits.
But even before that expansion, the unemployment system was strained by the surge in job losses. State unemployment offices have reported record levels of calls and online inquiries, and jobless workers have struggled to get through to file claims.
Dustin Sullivan, 39, finished his final shift at the check-in desk at the W Hotel in Times Square on March 19, but he had to wait to apply for jobless benefits until Wednesday of the following week — the day that New York had designated for people whose last names begin with the letters O through Z.
He spent most of the next week struggling to file a claim, first encountering a website crash and then a telephone nightmare: “Calling on the phone and getting a busy signal. Calling and getting an automated message saying no one’s available and hanging up on me. Calling and immediately getting a message in Spanish that I don’t understand. Calling and getting through-ish — to the first part of the session” — the part that takes your information and Social Security number before telling you to hold on to speak to a representative — “and then hangs up on you.”
Finally, on Tuesday, he managed to file his claim.
“So I now join the group who can shout out to the rest: ‘There’s hope!’” Mr. Sullivan wrote in an email.
Mr. Sullivan was one of more than 366,000 New Yorkers to file claims last week, up from 80,000 the week before, according to Thursday’s federal data. California, another state that has struggled with the deluge of filings, reported close to 900,000 claims last week, up from 186,000. Those figures, unlike the nationwide total, are not adjusted for seasonal patterns.
In a news conference this week, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said he knew the state’s claims system wasn’t keeping up with the surge, and he said hundreds of people were working to expand capacity.
“The site is so deluged that it keeps crashing because you literally have hundreds of thousands of people at any time trying to get on the site,” he said. “I apologize for the pain. It must be infuriating.”
Economists, too, have struggled to keep pace with the speed of the collapse. A month ago, most forecasters still thought the United States could avoid a recession. Today, many economists are expecting a decline in gross domestic product that rivals the worst periods of the Great Depression.
On Friday, the Labor Department will release its monthly report on hiring and unemployment, usually one of the most-watched indicators on the economic calendar. But the data was collected in early March, an eon ago in the coronavirus age. Most forecasters expect it to show only a modest uptick in the unemployment rate and a small decline in jobs, despite the wave of layoffs that hit later in the month.
For workers and businesses, the reversal of fortune has been head-spinning.
Barely a month ago, Elizabeth Mora quit her job in Utah to take a new position as a supply chain manager for MGM Resorts in Las Vegas. But by the time she crossed the state line in a moving truck two weeks later, the hospitality industry was beginning to shut down. After two days on the job she was furloughed, and the MGM hotel where she was staying temporarily as part of her relocation package had closed.
“In a moment, I became both jobless and homeless,” she said.
Now Ms. Mora is staying with an acquaintance and living out of the suitcase she filled with two weeks’ worth of clothes when she moved. The rest of her belongings are in a storage facility. She is applying for any job she can find and briefly considered selling home-baked bread — until she discovered that the local grocery stores had no more flour.
When she accepted the job at MGM, Ms. Mora said, she was excited to begin a new phase. Now, she said, she is just trying to survive.
“I picked up my entire life and I moved here, not only physically but emotionally,” she said. “I’ve never felt the sense of uncertainty like I do now.”"
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "WASHINGTON—Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell indicated the central bank is on track to raise interest rates by a half percentage point at its next meeting, stepping down from an unprecedented series of four 0.75-point rate rises aimed at combating high inflation.
Mr. Powell, in a speech Wednesday, said an overheated labor market needed to cool more for the Fed to be confident that inflation would make durable downward progress toward its 2% goal.
Because the Fed has raised rates rapidly and it takes time for those moves to influence the economy, it would make sense for officials to slow rate increases, he said at an event at the Brookings Institution. “The time for moderating the pace of rate increases may come as soon as the December meeting,” he said.
Mr. Powell reviewed signs of progress on the inflation fight, including a slowdown in interest-rate sensitive sectors of the economy such as housing and improving supply-chain conditions. But he said that declines in goods prices and rents, which have contributed notably to inflation over the last 18 months, might be insufficient if firms don’t slow their hiring.
“The labor market … shows only tentative signs of rebalancing, and wage growth remains well above levels that would be consistent with 2% inflation,” Mr. Powell said. “Despite some promising developments, we have a long way to go in restoring price stability.”
Inflation is running near a 40-year high and has triggered the most rapid series of interest-rate increases by the Fed since the early 1980s. The Fed seeks to reduce inflation by slowing the economy through tighter financial conditions—such as higher borrowing costs, lower stock prices and a stronger dollar—which typically curb demand.
SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS
Is the Fed taking the right steps to combat inflation? Join the conversation below.
Fed officials lifted their benchmark rate by 0.75 percentage point on Nov. 2 to a range between 3.75% and 4%. Many officials have signaled they are leaning toward approving a 0.5-point increase at their Dec. 13-14 meeting. They had held the rate near zero until March.
A big question now for the Fed is how much farther to keep raising rates. Some officials are concerned about causing unnecessary damage to the economy and labor market because it takes time for the full effects of those increases to ripple through the economy.
Other policy makers are concerned that price pressures could stay high because, despite improvements in supply chains and commodity markets, prices have picked up for more labor-intensive services.
Mr. Powell repeated his earlier view that officials were likely to raise rates to a somewhat higher level early next year than they had anticipated in projections released after their September meeting, when most officials saw their benchmark rate rising to between 4.5% and 5%.
“There is no doubt that we have made substantial progress,” he said. “We have more ground to cover.”
Mr. Powell’s comments signaled less confidence in forecasts that have repeatedly suggested an imminent and rapid deceleration in price pressures because inflation has mostly “moved stubbornly sideways” over the course of this year.
Newsletter Sign-up
Real Time Economics
The latest economic news, analysis and data curated weekdays by WSJ's Jeffrey Sparshott.
He focused part of his remarks on exploring why the share of Americans seeking work remains below its prepandemic level. The analysis carries important implications for the setting of interest rates because if wage pressures remain stronger in the coming years, that could lead to a period of greater volatility in wages, inflation and interest rates.
Mr. Powell said most of the shortfall appears to reflect older Americans who retired early when the pandemic hit the U.S. in March 2020—and from slower growth in the working-age population, which he said could reflect reduced levels of legal immigration and a surge in deaths during the pandemic.
Steps to boost workforce participation aren’t controlled by the Fed and wouldn’t be able to take effect rapidly enough to address the current bout of inflation, Mr. Powell said.
The upshot is that Fed policy will seek to slow inflation and wage growth by reducing demand for workers, a subject that Mr. Powell addressed delicately on Wednesday. “For the near term, a moderation of labor demand growth will be required to restore balance to the labor market,” he said.
While strong wage growth “is a good thing,” he implied it is too high right now to support a return to the 2% inflation rate the Fed targets. “For wage growth to be sustainable, it needs to be consistent with 2% inflation,” he said.
Separately, Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said on Wednesday that inflation could come down without broad layoffs occurring across the economy if companies slow hiring by reducing the number of unfilled jobs they’re trying to fill.
The U.S. unemployment rate stood at 3.7% in October. A rate between 4% and 5% would still indicate a robust labor market, she said at a New York Times event. “I think we can make a lot of progress in the labor market just on the hiring...and job opening side. I don’t think it’s necessary to see very substantial layoffs,” she added.
Write to Nick Timiraos at nick.timiraos@wsj.com
Inflation and the Economy
Analysis from The Wall Street Journal, selected by the editors
Continue reading your article with
a WSJ membership
Already a member? Sign In
- The Motley Fool:
New members save 55% on Stock Advisor
- Wayfair:
Up to 15% off + free shipping at Wayfair
- American Eagle Outfitters:
Sign up for emails and get 10% off American Eagle promo code
- Kohl's:
Kohl's coupon - 30% off sitewide for Rewards members
- Walmart:
Walmart coupon: $20 off your $50+ order
- Chase:
Get up to $625 unlimited commission-free online trades"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "What is at stake as Congress considers the E.P.A. budget? Far more than climate change.
The Trump administration’s proposed cuts to the Environmental Protection Agency budget are deep and wide-ranging. It seeks to shrink spending by 31 percent, to $5.7 billion from $8.1 billion, and to eliminate a quarter of the agency’s 15,000 jobs.
The cuts are so deep that even Republican lawmakers are expected to push back. Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, the chairwoman of the Interior and Environment Subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee, pointedly reminded Mr. Trump last month that his budget request was just “the first step in a long process.”
Here are some proposed cuts that are likely to face resistance when the budget reaches Congress.
Tap water
Flint, Mich., is still reeling from its tainted water crisis, and unsafe levels of lead have turned up in tap water in city after city. Still, the E.P.A. is looking to decrease grants that help states monitor public water systems by almost a third, to $71 million from $102 million, according to an internal agency memo first obtained by The Washington Post.
The Public Water System Supervision Grant Program has been critical in making sure communities have access to safe drinking water. In Texas, for example, state-contracted workers collect drinking water samples across the state, an effort funded in part by federal grants.Continue reading the main story
Much of the risk to the country’s water supply stems from its crumbling public water infrastructure: a network of pipes, treatment plants and other facilities built decades ago. Although Congress banned lead pipes in 1986, between 3.3 million and 10 million older ones remain, primed to leach lead into tap water.
Criminal and civil enforcement
Sharp cuts in the agency’s enforcement programs could curtail its ability to police environmental offenders and impose penalties. The budget proposal reduces spending on civil and criminal enforcement by almost 60 percent, to $4 million from a combined $10 million. It also eliminates 200 jobs.
Just last week, the agency fined Sunoco Pipeline, a subsidiary of the operator behind the Dakota Access pipeline, nearly $1 million over a 2012 spill. The spill sent 1,950 barrels of gasoline into two waterways near Wellington, Ohio, forcing the evacuation of 70 people.
One enforcement activity that could be set for an increase: security for Scott Pruitt, the new E.P.A. administrator. The agency has asked for 10 additional full-time staff members for a round-the-clock security detail — a first for an E.P.A. chief, who usually has only door-to-door protection — and more than doubling the agency’s infrastructure and operations staff.
Geographic programs
The agency is taking an equal-opportunity approach to regional cleanup programs, proposing to virtually eliminate all of them: Chesapeake Bay, Gulf of Mexico, Lake Champlain, Long Island Sound, Puget Sound, San Francisco Bay, South Florida, the Great Lakes.
Together, those projects amount to a loss of more than $400 million in federal funding for the regions involved. The largest part of that goes to the Great Lakes restoration effort, which is helping revive wetland habitats, clean up toxic pollution, combat invasive species and prevent runoff from farms and cities.
The E.P.A.’s defunding of these projects could backfire. Much of the federal money has gone toward helping bring affected communities to the table to find solutions. Absent that route, communities could sue the E.P.A. for failing to act, ultimately running up the agency’s legal bills and slowing remediation as cases wind their way through the courts.
Superfunds and brownfields
Superfund is as high-stakes as environmental programs get. It makes federal funds available for the cleanup of sites contaminated by hazardous substances and pollutants, like the now-defunct Wolff-Alport Chemical Company in Queens, in New York City, which was designated a Superfund site in 2014. The site is heavily contaminated with thorium, a radioactive metal with a half-life of 14 billion years that has been linked to a higher incidence of lung, pancreatic and bone cancer. Superfund money is helping clean up the thorium.
The Superfund program can actually save taxpayers money, because it lets the E.P.A. identify polluters and compel them to pay for the cleanup. But the proposed budget reduces its enforcement and remedial components by 45 percent, bringing it to $221 million from $404 million.
E.P.A. officials call Brownfields, a program that helps towns and cities redevelop former industrial sites, one of the agency’s most popular programs. The E.P.A. website still lists its success stories: refashioning an old textile mill in Hickory, N.C., into a retail, dining and event space, and redeveloping former factory sites on the banks of Iowa’s Cedar River into riverfront condominiums. Funding to states under the Brownfields program is set for a reduction of 30 percent, to $33 million from $48 million.
Endocrine disrupters
The exact science behind, and health consequences of, a class of chemicals called endocrine disrupters remains unsettled. With the proposed cuts to research at the E.P.A., it could stay that way.
The budget eliminates a $6 million research and screening effort targeting the chemicals, which are found widely in pesticides, plastics, shampoos and cosmetics, cash register receipts, food can linings and other products. The chemicals have been linked to breast cancer in women and hypospadias, a birth defect in boys.
Ending the program, which would result in the loss of nine jobs, would curtail the agency’s ability to review medical data and work with environmental lawyers to fashion an agency response.
Climate protection
It is no surprise that the new E.P.A. is targeting climate change initiatives, given the Trump administration’s hostility toward the science of global warming and a pro-business bent. But many of the programs that fall under the $70 million Climate Protection Program — which would be eliminated under the White House proposal — are industry favorites.
Take the Energy Star program for energy-efficient televisions, washers, dryers, lights and other consumer goods. Companies say Energy Star helps give their products a competitive edge, and also helps them sell overseas, where the standard has been adopted by the European Union, Japan, Australia and Canada, among major markets.
And the SmartWay program works with logistics companies to make their operations more climate friendly. SmartWay helps trucking companies fit their trucks with aerodynamic flaps and low-resistance tires, for example, that save fuel and reduce emissions.
Federal vehicle and fuels standards
It has been barely a year since Volkswagen agreed to pay as much as $14.7 billion to settle claims stemming from its diesel emissions cheating scandal, and the E.P.A. has accused a second automaker, Fiat Chrysler, of evading emissions standards. But the proposed budget cuts would all but eliminate the $48.7 million federal budget for vehicle tests and certification.
The budget foresees getting automakers themselves to pay for testing through fees. But that takes time to set up, and any funding shortfall in the meantime would mean a significant paring back of the work at E.P.A.’s emissions testing labs.
Nonpoint source grants
The Trump administration has declared its intent to roll back business-killing regulations. But the second-biggest item eliminated from the proposed budget, after the Great Lakes Restoration project, exists precisely because federal regulations do not cover all pollutants.
The $165 million Nonpoint Source Grant program helps states deal with pollutants from sources that are not directly regulated under the Clean Water Act — like the phosphorus that flows into Lake Erie from fertilizer, which feeds algae and weeds that starve the water of oxygen, harming fish and other wildlife.
Among other remedies, the nonpoint source grants have been used to help states create “buffer strips” — areas of thick vegetation that help filter the contaminated runoff. The proposed budget would eliminate the grants.
Radiation protection and response preparedness
When the 2011 Fukushima nuclear crisis in Japan sent radioactive plumes across the Pacific, the E.P.A.’s RadNet system monitored the fallout on America’s shores, deploying additional air monitors in Alaska and Hawaii and ordering accelerated samplings of rain, tap water and milk.
Over the next two months, laboratory analyses detected very low amounts of iodine and other radionuclides across the country. Levels remained far below the safety threshold, and the E.P.A. determined that no action was needed. But in the case of another nuclear accident, RadNet could help officials make science-based decisions on how to protect the public.
The proposed budget would defund the agency’s $3.3 million Radiation Protection program and eliminate 60 jobs. It would also remove four jobs from the Radiation Response Preparedness program; despite those job cuts, funding for that modest program would increase by $177,000, to just over $500,0000, to be used for “essential preparedness work only.”Continue reading the main story"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "The Fed cited job growth as a key reason for raising rates
Among the Fed’s roles are maximizing employment and moderating inflation. Job growth has strengthened steadily since the recession, and the Fed’s policy-making committee said in a statement it expected that progress to continue. Inflation remains weak, but the Fed said it expected prices to start rising more quickly.
Unemployment is falling toward precrisis levels and a new Fed labor market index that tracks a range of data has recovered most of the ground lost during the Great Recession.
Unemployment rate
10
%
8
6
4
The Fed’s
projected
range
2
0
’00
’09
’15
’17
Labor market conditions index
+15
0
–15
–30
–45
’00
’09
’15
Unemployment rate
10
%
8
The Fed’s
projected
range
6
4
2
0
’00
’09
’15
’16
’17
Labor market conditions index
+15
0
–15
–30
–45
’00
’09
’15
But officials remain concerned about sluggish inflation, which is both a sign of economic weakness and an impediment to faster growth.
Inflation
+4
The Fed’s
projected
range
+3
+2
%
+1
Personal consumption expenditures
0
’00
’09
’15
’17
Gross domestic product
+4
%
+3
+2
+1
0
The Fed’s
projected
range
–1
–2
Annual change
–3
’00
’09
’15
’17
Inflation
+4
+3
+2
%
The Fed’s
projected
range
+1
Personal consumption expenditures
0
’00
’09
’15
’16
’17
Gross domestic product
+4
%
+3
The Fed’s
projected
range
+2
+1
0
–1
–2
Annual change
–3
’00
’09
’15
’17
Government borrowing costs will increase as the Fed raises rates
Even as the federal debt grew substantially in recent years, the government’s annual interest payments barely increased thanks to the Fed’s efforts to minimize borrowing costs.
Federal funds target rate
6
%
5
4
3
2
1
0.5%
0
’00
’09
’15
U.S. government net interest outlays
White House’s
projections
$350
billion
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
’00
’09
’15
’17
Federal funds target rate
6
%
5
4
3
2
1
0.5%
0
’00
’09
’15
U.S. government net interest outlays
White House’s
projections
$350
billion
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
’00
’09
’15
’17
As the Fed raises rates, no borrower will feel the pain more acutely than the federal government, the nation’s largest borrower.
Federal debt held by the public
$15
trillion
12
White
House’s
projections
9
6
3
0
’00
’09
’15
’17
$15
trillion
Federal debt held by the public
12
White House’s
projections
9
6
3
0
’00
’09
’15
’17
Mortgage rates are also likely to rise
The Fed has fairly direct control over short-term interest rates, but only indirect influence over the rates on long-term debt. Still, most experts expect long-term rates to rise in coming years, increasing the cost of homes and cars.
30-year mortgage rates
9
%
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Monthly
0
’00
’09
’15
30-year mortgage rates
9
%
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Monthly
0
’00
’09
’15
Savers are likely to see higher rates too
One silver lining: As the Fed raises rates, banks, money-market funds and other savings vehicles are likely to start offering higher returns on safe investments.
1-year CD rates
6
%
5
4
3
2
1
Monthly
0
’00
’09
’15
1-year CD rates
6
%
5
4
3
2
1
Monthly
0
’00
’09
’15"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "A surprise hitch in trade talks between the United States and China spooked investors on Monday, sending Asian stocks tumbling and raising the prospect of a rough day for Wall Street.
Shares in China led the decline, falling more than 5 percent as of midday, after President Trump threatened to raise tariffs against Chinese-made goods to pressure Beijing into reaching a deal. Futures contracts, which try to predict the performance of shares in the United States, suggested that major stock indexes would open lower.
Stock markets in Asia have picked up in recent months on prospects that China and the United States would reach a truce in their trade war. The Chinese economy, the most important growth engine in Asia and one of the world’s largest, has also picked up in recent weeks after a surge of government-driven lending.
Mr. Trump’s comments on Sunday threatened to end that growth, rattling investors across the board. The value of China’s currency weakened, and prices for oil and agricultural products fell.
In China, the Shanghai Composite Index was down 5.4 percent midday.
In Hong Kong, the Hang Seng Index was down 3.3 percent as of midday. Taiwan’s Taiex was down 1.8 percent, while the S.&P./ASX 200 index in Australia was down less than 1 percent.
Markets in Japan and South Korea were closed for holidays on Monday."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "Advertisement
Supported by
The New Jobs Numbers Are Pretty Good, Actually
They fell far short of analyst expectations, but they reflect a steady expansion that is more rapid than other recent recoveries.
It’s not as bad as it looks.
That’s the most important thing to take away from Friday’s release of the September jobs report, which found that employers added 194,000 jobs last month, a far cry from the 500,000 analysts expected. The initial response among experts was to wonder whether it called for an exclamation of a mere “oof” or a more extreme “ooooooof.”
But when you peel apart the details, there is less reason to be concerned than that headline would suggest. The story of the economy in the second half of 2021 remains one of steady expansion that is more rapid than other recent recoveries. It is being held back by supply constraints and, in September at least, the emergence of the Delta variant. But the direction is clear, consistent and positive.
Much of the disappointment in payroll growth came from strange statistical quirks around school reopening. The number of jobs in state local education combined with private education fell by 180,000 in September — when the customary seasonal adjustments are applied.
There is reason to think the pandemic made those seasonal adjustments misleading. Schools reopened in September en masse, and employed 1.28 million more people (excluding seasonal adjustments) in September than in August. But a “normal” year, whatever that means anymore, would have featured an even bigger surge in employment. In other words, this might be a statistical artifact of a shrinking education sector earlier in the pandemic, not new information about what is happening this fall.
Or as the Bureau of Labor Statistics put it in its release, “Recent employment changes are challenging to interpret, as pandemic-related staffing fluctuations in public and private education have distorted the normal seasonal hiring and layoff patterns,” which is the government statistical agency equivalent of a shrug emoji.
Another detail in the report that takes some of the sting out of the weak payroll gains was news that July and August numbers were revised up by a combined 169,000 jobs, implying the economy entered the fall in a stronger place than it had seemed.
Meanwhile, the focus on the underwhelming job growth numbers has masked what should be viewed as unambiguously good news.
The unemployment rate fell to 4.8 percent, from 5.2 percent in August. It fell for good reasons, not bad — the number of people unemployed dropped by a whopping 710,000 while the number of people working rose by a robust 526,000. (These numbers are based on a survey of households, in contrast with the payroll numbers that are based on a survey of businesses; the two diverge from time to time, including this month.)
This represents a remarkably speedy recovery in the labor market — attaining sub-5 percent unemployment a mere 17 months after the end of the deepest recession in modern times. By contrast, in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the jobless rate did not reach 4.8 percent until January 2016, six and a half years after the technical end of that recession.
Part of it is the unusual nature of a pandemic-induced recession and part of it is the highly aggressive response of fiscal policymakers to the crisis. But the result is that jobs are abundant and most people who want to work can.
And while participation in the labor force remains well below prepandemic levels and has lots of room for improvement, it is not as bad as it was in that last expansion.
In September, for example, the share of people 25 to 54 who were in the labor force — that is, either working or looking for work — was 81.7 percent. That is still well below 83.1 percent before the pandemic, but considerably better than the 81 percent achieved in January 2016, the point in the last expansion when the unemployment rate got this low.
Labor force participation remains the Achilles' heel of this recovery. Many Americans who have dropped out of the work force — because of whatever mix of burnout, challenges with child care, or ability to live on pent-up savings or government benefits — are not yet back in action.
Notably, even as expanded unemployment insurance benefits expired in early September, there was no surge in participation in the labor force. The labor force participation rate for all adults fell by 0.1 of a percentage point, to 61.6 percent. That suggests that the end of extra-generous job benefits may not be the solution to labor shortage woes that many business groups have argued it would be.
Low rates of labor force participation and the weaker-than-expected job growth numbers are most likely two parts of the same story. Businesses want to hire and expand, and labor shortages are real. But there are fewer workers available to be hired right now than there were before the pandemic.
That makes for good opportunities for Americans who do want to work. It is reflected in higher pay — average hourly earnings in the private sector were up 4.6 percent in September from a year ago. But it is also acting as a constraint on just how fast this recovery can go.
Advertisement"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "Supported by
Hiring Remains Strong Even as Fed Tries to Cool Economy
The Labor Department reported 390,000 new jobs in May, as policymakers try to ease inflation without inducing a recession.
Monthly change in jobs
+600,000 jobs
+390,000
in May
+400,000
+200,000
May
’21
Aug.
Nov.
Feb.
’22
May
+600,000 jobs
+390,000
in May
+400,000
+200,000
May ’21
Aug.
Nov.
Feb. ’22
May
American employers extended an impressive run of hiring in May, even as policymakers took steps to cool the economy in an effort to ease high inflation.
The Labor Department reported Friday that employers added 390,000 jobs, the 17th straight monthly gain. The unemployment rate was 3.6 percent for the third straight month, a touch away from a half-century low.
At the same time, the labor force grew by 330,000 people, and the share of adults employed or looking for work continued to edge closer to prepandemic levels.
The data signaled that the Federal Reserve’s initial moves to dial back its monetary support for the economy were — at least so far — not constraining business activity so much that hiring was feeling a pinch.
After the strong rebound from the depths of the coronavirus lockdowns — all but 800,000 of the 22 million jobs that were lost have been recovered — the Fed has shifted its emphasis from maximum employment to its other mandate: price stability. The challenge is to apply its primary tool, a steady series of interest-rate increases, without inflicting a recession.
“I think we’re on sort of what looks like a glide path right now, and that’s good — nothing’s broken,” said Guy Berger, the principal economist at the career-focused social network LinkedIn. “But keep fast-forwarding it a year and the question marks are still big.”
The closely watched indicators include the impact on wages, which have been increasing at a pace not seen in decades, though not enough to keep up with inflation over the past year. The Fed is worried that rising labor costs will be passed along to consumers.
Wages kept rising across industries.
Percent change in average hourly earnings for nonmanagers since January 2019
On that score, the Labor Department report showed little change in trajectory. Average hourly earnings rose 0.3 percent from the previous month, the same pace as in April, and were 5.2 percent higher than a year earlier, compared with a 5.5 percent year-over-year increase in April.
“It’s moderating, but it’s not moderating to a level, I think, where it’s consistent with the Fed’s inflation goals,” said Michael Feroli, chief U.S. economist at J.P. Morgan, said of wage growth. He said the Fed would probably want wages to cool toward an annualized 3.5 percent pace, at the higher end, a rate that officials view as aligned with 2 percent inflation.
The State of Jobs in the United States
Job gains continue to maintain their impressive run, even as government policymakers took steps to cool the economy and ease inflation.
- May Jobs Report: U.S. employers added 390,000 jobs and the unemployment rate remained steady at 3.6 percent in the fifth month of 2022.
- Vacancies: Employers had 11.4 million vacancies in April down from a revised total of nearly 11.9 million the previous month, which was a record.
- Opportunities for Teenagers: Jobs for high school and college students are expected to be plentiful this summer, and a large market means better pay.
- Higher Interest Rates: Spurred by red-hot inflation, the Federal Reserve has begun raising interest rates. What does that mean for the job market?
President Biden gave a nuanced celebration of the jobs data in remarks on Friday, emphasizing recent gains while arguing that a slowdown would be welcome, allowing inflation to ease.
“The point is this: We’ve laid an economic foundation that’s historically strong,” Mr. Biden said. “Now we’re moving forward to a new moment, where we can build on that foundation, build a future of stable, steady growth so that we can bring down inflation without sacrificing all of the historic gains that we have made.”
Stocks declined on Friday and bond yields rose as investors evidently read the report as reinforcing the Fed’s muscular efforts, which risk denting economic growth. “The better the data, the more difficult that a pause or reduced pace of tightening later this year becomes,” analysts at TD Securities wrote in a research report published after the jobs numbers were released.
The continued job gains are among many indications of a vibrant economy. Reports from the nation’s largest banks show checking accounts are still above 2019 levels for nearly all income groups. New bankruptcies and debt-collection proceedings are both at their lowest levels since tracking began in 1999.
Yet those encouraging trends have been at odds with the generally sour national mood, dominated by inflation concerns. U.S. consumer sentiment declined in early May to the lowest since 2011, according to the University of Michigan.
The unemployment rate stayed flat in May.
The share of people who have looked for work in the past four weeks or are temporarily laid off
15%
10
5
3.6%
2019
2020
2021
2022
15%
10
5
3.6%
2019
2020
2021
2022
And with a potential change in the economic cycle, economic security is not evenly distributed among households. If tightening financial conditions prompt businesses to downsize, research shows that “last hired” workers will typically be the “first fired” — and that Black and Hispanic workers and those with less education are particularly vulnerable.
But a broad range of economists and policymakers, including Jerome H. Powell, the Fed chair, stress that more modest wage gains when paired with milder prices will be more sustainable for all workers, who are also consumers, in the long run.
“The Fed at this point is saying, look, we’d rather head off inflationary pressures, because if we have to slam on the brakes, then we’re going to cause a recession and it will be worse for these underserved communities,” said Gerald Cohen, an economist at the Kenan-Flagler Business School at the University of North Carolina. “It’s a challenge, because they want to pull people into the labor force. They know the way to do that is through higher wages. But higher wages can also breed higher inflation.”
For employers, too, the prospective change in the economic picture may not be spread evenly.
“Businesses with high profitability, easy access to capital, the capacity to automate and pricing power are still eager to hire,” said Bill Adams, chief economist at Comerica Bank, a large commercial bank based in Texas. “But businesses that are seeing their margins squeezed by rising costs, like hospitality, or that are seeing demand soften, like retail, are pulling job postings as their outlook softens. And competition for workers is squeezing lower-paying employers out of the job market.”
Richard Canny, the president of Ultimation in Roseville, Mich., is feeling that squeeze. His company’s conveyor belts and simple robots for use in warehousing and distribution sold briskly during the tight labor market, as e-commerce companies sought to make each worker more productive.
With 45 employees, Mr. Canny said, Ultimation has managed to stay at full staffing by raising wages — to $17 to $18 an hour to start, from around $13 to $15 — as well as offering perks like parental leave and partial tuition reimbursement. His white-collar employees have retained the flexibility to work from home. All that, he said, is necessary to compete with big employers in the area like Amazon.
“Small companies historically haven’t had to offer the same kind of benefits as the large ones, but I think that’s changed since Covid,” Mr. Canny said.
Prime-age workers came back to the labor force in May
Share of those ages 25 to 54 who are in the labor force (employed, unemployed but looking for work or on temporary layoff)
At this point in the recovery, labor- and business-oriented economists alike believe that expanding the supply of labor may be even more important than jobs gains themselves.
There are nearly two openings for every job seeker, and several factors are unlikely to change in the near term. Some, like the large cohort of retiring baby boomers, are simply demographic.
More opportunities for women could be part of the answer. Employment of women was up 181,000 in May, yet more than 700,000 below the level in February 2020.
That lag may stem, in part, from the lapse of last year’s child tax credit expansion, argued Elizabeth Ananat, a professor of women and economics at Barnard College, who has researched the program’s effects on parental employment and labor force participation.
The credit gave most families monthly payments of up to $250 per older child and $300 per young child, “helping families weather both inflation and the not-fully-recovered job market, leading to our biggest-ever cuts in poverty for families,” Ms. Ananat said. For families with a child under 5, she said, a quarter of the credit was being spent on child care.
Summer Seay, 34, of Chattanooga, Tenn., worked as a senior customer service representative at Cigna, the health insurer, throughout the pandemic, making $23 an hour. But she left in late April to spend more time caring for her three children while assisting her husband with “more of the paperwork” for the family’s wooden pallet business.
One reason she decided to leave the wage-earning work force was frustration that much of her pay was merely covering child care costs, which had mounted to $700 a week just as the expanded child tax credit expired.
“It kind of went hand in hand,” she said. “Because our big thing is food, feeding the kids.”
Another missing element of the work force are recent immigrants. Goldman Sachs researchers said recently that because of visa restrictions and health protocols during 2020 and 2021, the total number of workers was about 1.6 million below where it would be otherwise. Legal immigration rates and refugee admissions have returned to prepandemic levels under the Biden administration, the analysts found, but are not enough to make up the difference.
Jason Karaian contributed reporting."
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "Unexpectedly dismal job growth last month cast a shadow on the nation’s economy, as a government report on Friday sent analysts scrambling for adjectives like “dreadful,” “a body blow” and “grim” to describe just how disappointing they found the latest employment figures.
The Labor Department found that the jobless rate held steady at 5.1 percent in September, but wage gains stalled, the labor force shrank and employers created many fewer positions than they had been averaging in recent months. While the latest report is only a snapshot of the economy and the weakness may ultimately prove fleeting, it made clear that ordinary workers are still failing to take home the kind of monetary rewards normally expected from a recovery that has being going on for more than six years.
The new estimates came just two weeks after the Federal Reserve decided that the economy’s advance remained too fragile to risk lifting interest rates from their near-zero level — even as it hinted an increase would come before the year’s end. Now, experts said, signs of a slowdown may well push any rise into 2016.
The odds of a move in December have “clearly diminished,” said Carl Tannenbaum, chief economist at Northern Trust in Chicago. “There’s nothing good in this morning’s report.”
Despite the lagging economy, the mere likelihood that the Fed would yet again postpone a retreat on its stimulus program may have ultimately buoyed some investors’ confidence. After opening sharply down after the Labor Department’s announcement, the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index turned around, ending the day up over 1.4 percent, to 1,951.36. The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury bond dipped below 2 percent.
“That may assure the markets that unconditional support from monetary policy will be sustained,” Mr. Tannenbaum said. “Low for long may go on even longer.”
Diane Swonk, chief economist at Mesirow Financial in Chicago, said the Fed chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, had “really made it clear that she’d like to re-engage those sidelined in recent years by allowing the unemployment rate to fall below what most consider full employment. It’s the only way we’re going to regain living standards lost in recent years.”
The Fed faces an uphill battle, she and other analysts suggested, as the United States now appears to be importing some of the economic malaise that has infected other parts of the world, particularly China and Europe.
Ms. Swonk, who labeled the employment numbers a “body blow,” warned that the economy was likely to be plagued by subpar growth for a while.
Industry has been hurt by the strong dollar and weak global demand; the oil industry has cut back sharply on investment in response to the fall in energy prices; and farming has suffered because of slumping agricultural commodity prices. Last month, the sectors that absorbed the greatest job losses were mining, logging and manufacturing.
By contrast, health care, leisure and hospitality, and professional and business services remained strong, highlighting other signs of sturdiness in the economy that countered the otherwise disheartening jobs news.
Consumer demand at home has been on the upswing and vehicle sales have been strong. And a broader measure of unemployment, which includes part-time workers who want full-time jobs and those too discouraged to even search, dipped to 10 percent in September, its lowest mark since May 2008.
“Against the backdrop of accelerating real consumption, it’s hard to see what’s driving this softening and what could sustain it,” said Ian Shepherdson, chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, sounding a more optimistic note. “We have to expect better numbers next month, and the odds still strongly favor upward revisions, despite the unexpected downward revision to August.”
But Mr. Shepherdson was drowned out by a chorus of more negative reactions to the estimate that employers created only 142,000 jobs in September. Adding to the gloom, the Labor Department revised August’s employment numbers, registering only 136,000 new jobs for that month, well below the 173,000 originally reported.
With Friday’s revision, job gains have averaged just 167,000 a month for the last three months, compared with an average of about 260,000 for 2014. Average hourly wages in the private sector dropped slightly, as did the average length of the workweek.
With the presidential campaign already underway, neither party wasted much time in using the jobs report to attack the other side.
Republicans criticized the president for promoting a program that they argue stifles economic growth. The slowdown may provide a political opening for Republican contenders to attack Mr. Obama and the Democrats on an issue that was not resonating as much with voters when the job market was on the upswing.
In response, President Obama vowed on Friday not to sign another temporary spending measure after the one passed this week in an effort to raise the pressure on Congress to reach a long-term agreement to finance the government.
Speaking to reporters at the White House, Mr. Obama warned that the economy could be endangered by the continual game of budget chicken encouraged by conservative Republicans in hopes of forcing Democrats to give ground on other issues, like health care and the fate of Planned Parenthood.
The short-term spending bill passed this week to pay for government operations only until Dec. 11, he said, was a “gimmick” that “sets up another potential manufactured crisis just two weeks before Christmas.” He added: “This is not the way the U.S. should be operating.”
To prevent a recurrence, he said he would veto any further budget measures postponing a full-fledged spending plan. “I will not sign another shortsighted spending bill like the one Congress sent me this week,” Mr. Obama said. “We purchased ourselves another 10 weeks. We need to use them.”
While overall growth remains on a slow but steady track, the job outlook varies markedly depending on geography, training and industry.
Looking at the feeble rise in median wages, Andrew Chamberlain, chief economist at Glassdoor Economic Research, pointed out that such figures masked a wide disparity among industries. Workers in financial services, construction and graphic design, for example, have on average enjoyed double-digit wage growth from the previous year. Those stuck in neutral or suffering from effective wage declines included those in the manufacturing, retail clothing and textile industries.
The demand for young, high-technology workers has been evident to Isaac Oates, the chief executive of Justworks, a human resources management company that handles mostly small businesses. “We see that a lot of companies are growing quickly” in this area, saying his own firm has grown to 60 workers from 40 over the past three months in order to keep pace.
Other industries, like travel and leisure, have proved more resilient job creators, even if wages have not grown much. An improving housing market has also helped push down the number of unemployed workers with construction experience to its lowest level since 2000, according to the Associated General Contractors of America.
The picture is bleaker for those in the low-skill corners of the economy.
“We’re still finding a lot of skilled jobs come open, but it’s certainly slowed down for the unskilled,” said Robert A. Funk, chairman and chief executive of Express Employment Professionals, a staffing agency based in Oklahoma City with 750 offices.
Skilled workers are at a premium at Advanced Technology Services, a manufacturing consulting company based in Peoria, Ill.
“Where we’re struggling is in the area of talented people in manufacturing,” Jeff Owens, the company’s president, said, mentioning that he would like to add about 160 managers, electricians, information technology workers and machinists to his 3,300-person staff.
Location also matters. Mr. Funk, a former chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, said he observed a slowing down in the last six weeks, with the biggest drop-offs in the oil-drilling states, including Texas, Oklahoma and North and South Dakota.
Others fear that the economy is never going to deliver many gains to workers who have been waiting years to receive any bounty from the upswing in business activity.
William Spriggs, chief economist for the A.F.L.-C.I.O., said: “We’ve pretty much reached a kind of stability, and the unemployment rate will continue to fall, mostly because of retirements.”
An analysis this week from Morgan Stanley noted that the decline in the unemployment rate to 5.1 percent in August, from 5.5 percent in May, was almost entirely attributable to changes in the labor force participation rate. The percentage of the working-age population that is employed — which many economists consider a better indicator of the health of the job market than the official jobless figure — has stayed flat at under 60 percent for several years, still well below its prerecession level of about 63.
Public sector jobs were one of the few bright spots, growing by 24,000 in September, thanks to hiring on the state and local level. But government workers — from teachers to police officers to transit workers — have not made up the lost ground, said Elise Gould, a senior economist at the Economic Policy Institute, a labor-oriented research organization in Washington.
“The number of teachers and education staff fell dramatically during the recession,” Ms. Gould said, “and has failed to recover to anywhere near its prerecession level, let alone the level that would be required to keep up with an expanding student population.”
An earlier version of this article referred incorrectly to the economy. It is heading into the final quarter of 2015, of course — not 2016."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "President Donald Trump has shifted the economy so that once-disregarded blue-collar manufacturing workers are now recovering jobs faster than coastal service-sector employees, the Washington Post acknowledged Sunday.
“Blue-collar jobs are growing at their fastest rate in more than 30 years, helping fuel a hiring boom in many small towns and rural areas that are strong supporters of President Trump ahead of November’s mid-term elections,” said the Post, under the headline “Under Trump, the jobs boom has finally reached blue-collar workers. Will it last?”
According to the Post:
Rural employment grew at an annualized rate of 5.1 percent in the first quarter. Smaller metro areas grew 5.0 percent. That’s significantly larger than the 4.1 percent growth seen in large urban areas that recovered earlier from the Great Recession, according to an analysis by the Brookings Institution’s Metropolitan Policy Program of a separate set of Labor Department data released on Wednesday.
In the past year, the economy has added 656,000 blue-collar jobs, compared to 1.7 million added in the services sector. But the rate of growth in blue-collar jobs is speeding up, while service-sector job growth has hovered around 1.3 percent over the past year.
The New York Times is also admitting that Trump’s economic policies are reaching people outside the Democratic Party’s base of coastal cities — and is also saying pay raises could soon rise faster because companies and investors have run out of alternatives. On Sept 7, the Times reported:
The headlines for the August job numbers released this morning are nothing but good. Employers added a robust 201,000 jobs, the unemployment rate remained at the rock-bottom level of 3.9 percent, and wages grew the fastest they have in nine years.
There’s no doubt that this is the best economy in quite a long time for American workers, who by a wide range of measures can find a job more easily than they have in a decade …
But the fact that higher pay raises are finally showing up in the data is another piece of evidence that employers are coming up against the limits of the labor force. Just maybe, after years of trying every recruitment technique other than raising hourly pay, employers are starting to turn more to that option.
Trump’s economic promises to aid the manufacturing sector were ridiculed before and after the election by the Democratic Party’s progressive elite.
Throughout President Barack Obama’s term, the progressive elite steered opportunities and wealth away from manufacturing sectors, which were deemed to be bad for the environment but ideal for relocation via free-trade deals to China and other Asian economies. The progressives also steered wealth, government spending, and social status towards their service-sector supporters in wealthy coastal cities and in post-graduate career slots. For Obama, Obama repeatedly praised Silicon Valley CEOs, teachers, students, environmentalists, as well as “community organizers.”
Under Trump, however, the economy’s gains are being spread more evenly throughout the nation and across the workforce.
For example, President Barack Obama’s top economic advisor, Jason Furman, posted a chart showing that lower-income workers are seeing the greatest gains:
Neither of the two articles in the Washington Post or the New York Times recognized any role for Trump’s low-immigration/high-wages policy, even though it has modestly reduced the inflow of cheap-labor migrants and penalized companies who hire illegal immigrants.
Trump has also pressured U.S. companies to reduce outsourcing of middle-class jobs via the H-1B and other visa-worker programs which have helped keep salaries flat for many college-graduates for at least two decades.
But Trump’s rising pressure for popular pay-raises before the 2018 election is prompting business groups to step up their lobbying for quick access to more foreign workers.
Business-first GOP Rep. Kevin Yoder added four cheap-labor programs to the 2019 spending plan for the Department of Homeland Security, in the hope that Trump will approve those cheap-labor programs in exchange for extra spending on the border wall.
The Kansas representative’s four-part cheap-labor plan was endorsed by nearly all GOP members on the House appropriations committee in July and likely was backed by GOP leaders.
The middle-class “country caps” outsourcing bill was endorsed by Amazon, IBM and the billionaire founders of FWD.us, partly because it helps many investors continue replacing American graduates with cheap foreign graduates. Yoder says his bill would end discrimination, but it is backed by many business lobbyists and critics say it will boost discrimination against Americans.
Those cheap-labor programs must be stripped from Yoder bill before the election, said RJ Hauman, policy director at the Federation for American Immigration Reform. “We fear the president will sign something [after the election] that does contain that border wall funding despite the other things in it that fly in the face of his agenda,” he said.
Overall, the Washington-imposed economic policy of economic growth via immigration shifts wealth from young people towards older people by flooding the market with cheap foreign labor.
Four million young Americans will join the workforce this year, but the federal government will also import 1.1 million legal immigrants, and allow an army of at least 2 million visa-workers to work U.S. jobs.
That process spikes profits and Wall Street values by cutting salaries for manual and skilled labor offered by blue-collar and white-collar employees. The policy also drives up real estate prices, widens wealth-gaps, reduces high-tech investment, increases state and local tax burdens, hurts kids’ schools and college education, pushes Americans away from high-tech careers, and sidelines at least 5 million marginalized Americans and their families, including many who are now struggling with opioid addictions. Immigration also pulls investment and wealth away from heartland states because investment flows towards the large immigrant populations living in the coastal states.
."
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "HONG KONG — The risk that a trade war between China and the United States was entering a dangerous new phase sent global markets lower again on Thursday.
Stocks on Wall Street, which fell more than 3 percent on Tuesday, again slid into negative territory for the year, opening more than 1 percent lower. United States markets were closed on Wednesday in observance of President George Bush’s funeral.
The drop on Thursday followed the arrest of a prominent Chinese technology executive at the request of the United States, which appeared to dash hopes that a trade-war cease-fire reached between the economic giants over the weekend would last.
In recent days, doubts and confusion about that truce have grown, sending markets lower. But news that the chief financial officer of the Chinese tech giant Huawei, Meng Wanzhou, had been arrested in Canada raised fresh uncertainty, not only about the truce, but about the possibility that new phase in the trade war posed substantial risks for the tech companies that have driven major gains for American investors in recent years.
Ms. Meng was arrested in Vancouver on Saturday, even as President Trump and President Xi Jinping of China were dining together in Buenos Aires and agreeing to a 90-day pause in their countries’ trade war. The arrest was expected to renew tensions.
All major markets in Asia ended the trading day down more than 1 percent, and several slid further. Results were grimmer in Europe, where major indexes in London, Frankfurt and Paris had hit their lowest levels in about two years by late morning.
In Asia, the tone for the day was set in Hong Kong, where investors rattled by Ms. Meng’s arrest focused their attention on technology stocks and the overall market dropped 2.5 percent. The shock wave was felt across the border in Shenzhen, where stocks fell 2.2 percent.
In Tokyo, the market fell nearly 2 percent after the governor of the Bank of Japan warned that the trade war would hurt the Japanese economy. Traders in Seoul, South Korea, pushed the market down more than 1.5 percent; stocks in Taiwan were down 2.3 percent.
Concerns persist that the tensions between the United States and China could further slow a global economy already showing signs of cooling.
“The world economy is still expanding at a rapid pace, but cracks are starting to appear in the global growth picture,” Brian Coulton, a chief economist at Fitch Ratings, wrote in a note to clients. Fitch has repeatedly warned of China’s debt binge and the challenges facing the second-largest economy after the United States.
The week began an optimistic note, with the announcement that Mr. Trump and Mr. Xi had reached a deal on the sidelines of the Group of 20 meeting. Stocks around the globe soared on the news.
But a series of tweets from Mr. Trump, who called himself “a Tariff Man” prompted a new round of selling.
The only thing that seems certain is more uncertainty, analysts said.
“While the likelihood of an ongoing dialogue after months of no discussions and the pause on tariffs are still positive developments, it’s clear that negotiations will be challenging and a source of volatility,” Mark Haefele, chief investment officer at UBS wealth management, said in a note to clients."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "Retail Sales Jump and Jobless Claims Drop in New Signs of Recovery: Live Updates
Jobless claims fell last week to their lowest level of the pandemic, renewing confidence in a dynamic economic revival.
About 613,000 people filed first-time claims for state unemployment benefits last week, the Labor Department said Thursday, a decrease of 153,000 from the previous week.
In addition, 132,000 filed for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, a federal program that covers freelancers, part-timers and others who do not routinely qualify for state benefits. That was a decline of 20,000 from the previous week.
Neither figure is seasonally adjusted.
In another sign of the recovery underway, Retail sales surged in March, the Commerce Department said on Thursday, as Americans spent their latest round of government stimulus checks and the continued roll out of coronavirus vaccines lured more people back into stores.
The 9.8 percent increase last month was a strong comeback from the nearly 3 percent drop in February.
With the pandemic’s end seemingly in sight, the economy is poised for a robust comeback. But weekly applications for unemployment claims have remained stubbornly high for months, frustrating the recovery even as businesses reopen and vaccination rates increase.
“The job market conditions for job seekers have really improved extremely quickly between January and now,” said Julia Pollak, a labor economist at the job site ZipRecruiter. “But there are still huge barriers to returning to work.”
Jobless claims for the next few months could remain much higher than they were before the pandemic as the labor market adjusts to a new normal.
Concerns about workplace safety persist, especially for workers who are not yet vaccinated. Many children are still attending schools remotely, complicating the full-time work prospects for their caregivers.
But there is hope on the horizon as those barriers begin to fall. President Biden moved up the deadline for states to make all adults eligible for vaccination to April 19, and every state has complied. Students who have been learning remotely will begin to return to the classroom in earnest.
“This was the deepest, swiftest recession ever, but it’s also turning into the fastest recovery,” Ms. Pollak said. “And I don’t think we should lose sight of that just because some of the measures are a little stubborn.”
Retail sales surged in March, the Commerce Department said on Thursday, as Americans spent their latest round of government stimulus checks and the continued roll out of coronavirus vaccines lured more people back into stores.
The 9.8 percent increase last month was a strong comeback from the nearly 3 percent drop in February, when previous stimulus money had dissipated and a series of winter storms made travel difficult across much of the United States.
The rebound in March sales shows how, a year after the nation’s economy locked down to prevent the spread of the virus, consumer spending remains highly dependent on government support. It also reflects that many areas of consumption frozen by the pandemic have bounced back. Sales of clothing and accessories rose 18 percent, while restaurants and bars saw a 13 percent increase.
President Biden’s $1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan, which was signed into law last month, provides direct payments of $1,400 to lower-income Americans. Many of these checks began arriving in households toward the end of last month, when economists saw signs that spending was ramping up again, such as increased hotel occupancy and travel through airports.
Economists at Morgan Stanley had predicted that core retail sales would jump 6.5 percent in March, driven by the stimulus checks that started arriving in people’s bank accounts around March 17. The investment bank said 30 percent of consumers tend to spend their checks within the first 10 days, suggesting that many other consumers have yet to spend their checks, which could strengthen April sales.
More broadly, American consumers are also feeling increasingly optimistic as more people become vaccinated and venture out more frequently. One measure of consumer confidence, tabulated by the Conference Board, said confidence increased about 20 points in March from February, fueled by increased income and stronger business and employment expectations.
Advertisement
Reuters will begin charging for access to its website as it tries to capture a slice of the digital subscription business.
The company, one of the largest news organizations in the world, announced the new paywall on Thursday, as well as a redesigned website aimed at a “professional” audience wanting business, financial and general news.
After registration and a free preview period, a subscription to Reuters.com will cost $34.99 a month, the same as Bloomberg’s digital subscription. The Wall Street Journal’s digital subscription costs $38.99 a month, while The New York Times costs $18.42 monthly.
Reuters.com attracts 41 million unique visitors a month. Months of audience research showed that those readers were divided in two separate groups: those wanting breaking news and professionals looking for context and analysis about how news affected their industry, Josh London, chief marketing officer at Reuters, said in an interview.
Reuters will roll out new sections on its website for subscribers in coming weeks that include coverage of legal news, sustainable business, energy, health care and the auto industry. It also plans to introduce industry-specific newsletters.
Mr. London described the new website as “the largest digital transformation at Reuters in a decade.” He declined to provide specifics on digital subscription goals but said that it represented “a major opportunity for us.”
Arlyn Gajilan, the digital news director at Reuters, said she expected to expand the digital team working on the revamped website.
On Monday, Reuters announced that Alessandra Galloni, a global managing editor, would become its next editor in chief. Ms. Galloni, who will be the first woman to helm the news agency in its history, starts her new role on Monday. She takes over from Stephen J. Adler, who retired after running Reuters for a decade.
Ms. Gajilan said that Ms. Galloni had been closely involved in the new direction of Reuters.com.
“She’s a very strong advocate for all things digital at Reuters,” Ms. Gajilan said.
U.S. stocks are set to rise when trading begins on Thursday as more companies report first-quarter earnings and retail sales data is expected to show a big increase in spending in March.
The S&P 500 was expected to open 0.5 percent higher, futures indicated.
After a bumper market debut, Coinbase shares rose 11 percent in premarket trading. On Wednesday, the cryptocurrency exchange ended its first day of trading at $328.28 a share, valuing the company at nearly $86 billion — more than 10 times its last valuation as a private company.
Shares in Bank of America rose 2.5 percent in premarket trading after the company reported better-than-expected revenue from sales and trading. The bank joins its peers in reporting a jump in earnings. On Wednesday, executives at Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo all delivered upbeat economic forecasts.
Retail sales rose 5.8 percent in March, according to economists surveyed by Bloomberg, rebounding from a 3 percent drop the previous month.
Elsewhere in markets
Yields on 10-year U.S. Treasury notes dropped to 1.61 percent. On Wednesday, Jerome H. Powell, the chair of the Federal Reserve, reiterated the central bank’s intention of keeping monetary policy accommodative for a long time. He said the bank would probably slow its bond-buying program “well before” it lifts its policy interest rate.
European stock indexes also rose. The Stoxx Europe 600 index increased for a third straight day. It was up 0.3 percent to a record high.
The Russian ruble dropped 1.2 percent against the dollar on Thursday. The Biden administration is expected to announce a string of measures against Russia, including financial sanctions for the hacking of government and private networks and a range of other activity.
Shortages of semiconductors, fueled by pandemic interruptions and production issues at multibillion-dollar chip factories, have sent shock waves through the economy. Questions about chips are reverberating among both businesses and policymakers trying to navigate the world’s dependence on the small components.
Most attention has focused on temporary closings of big U.S. car plants. But the chips are in everything from cash registers and kitchen appliances, and the problem is affecting many other sectors, particularly the server systems and PCs used to deliver and consume internet services that became crucial during the pandemic, Don Clark reports for The New York Times.
“Every aspect of human existence is going online, and every aspect of that is running on semiconductors,” said Pat Gelsinger, the new chief executive of the chip maker Intel who attended the meeting with the president on Monday. “People are begging us for more.”
The chip shortage potentially affects just about any company adding communications or computing features to products. Many examples were described in 90 comments filed by companies and trade groups to a supply chain review by President Biden, including a laundry list of needs from industry giants like Amazon and Boeing.
Dan Rozycki is the president of a small engineering firm, that sells small sensors used to monitor construction sites to ensure concrete is hardening properly. His firm is for now among the lucky chip users. It planned ahead and has enough chips to keep making the roughly 50,000 sensors it supplies each year to construction sites. But his distributor has warned him it might not be able to deliver more of them until late 2022, he said.
“Is that going to halt those projects?” Mr. Rozycki asked. He is scouring the market for other distributors that might have the two needed chips in stock. Other possibilities include redesigning the sensors to use different chips.
Advertisement
An international coalition of 35 children’s and consumer groups called on Instagram on Thursday to scrap its plans to develop a version of the popular photo-sharing app for users under age 13.
Instagram’s push for a separate children’s app comes after years of complaints from legislators and parents that the platform has been slow to identify underage users and protect them from sexual predators and bullying.
But in a letter to Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook — the company that owns the photo-sharing service — the nonprofit groups warned that a children’s version of Instagram would not mitigate such problems. While 10- to 12-year-olds with Instagram accounts would be unlikely to switch to a “babyish version” of the app, the groups said, it could hook even younger users on endless routines of photo-scrolling and body-image shame.
“While collecting valuable family data and cultivating a new generation of Instagram users may be good for Facebook’s bottom line,” the groups, led by the Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood in Boston, said in the letter to Mr. Zuckerberg, “it will likely increase the use of Instagram by young children who are particularly vulnerable to the platform’s manipulative and exploitative features.”
The coalition of nonprofit groups also includes the Africa Digital Rights’ Hub in Ghana; the Australian Council on Children and the Media; the Center for Digital Democracy in Washington; Common Sense Media in San Francisco; the Consumer Federation of America; and the 5Rights Foundation in Britain.
Stephanie Otway, a Facebook spokeswoman, said that Instagram was in the early stages of developing a service for children as part of an effort to keep those under 13 off its main platform. Although Instagram requires users to be at least 13, many younger children have lied about their age to set up accounts.
Ms. Otway said that company would not show ads in any Instagram product developed for children younger than 13, and that it planned to consult with experts on children’s health and safety on the project. Instagram is also working on new age-verification methods to catch younger users trying to lie about their age, she said.
“The reality is that kids are online,” Ms. Otway said. “They want to connect with their family and friends, have fun and learn, and we want to help them do that in a way that is safe and age-appropriate.”
A former editor at Vanity Fair has been working to create a new digital publication, in which writers will share in subscription revenue — Vanity Fair meets Substack. The new company behind the publication, Heat Media, hopes to unveil it in the coming months, four people with knowledge of the matter said. The start-up is partly the brainchild of Jon Kelly, a former editor at Vanity Fair. One of the backers is the private equity firm TPG, which would take three seats on the Heat Media board, the people said. Another investor is 40 North, a related investment arm of Standard Industries, a global industrials company, the people said. Heat Media has raised around $7 million so far, according to the people.
Kimberly Godwin, a veteran CBS News executive, was named the next president of ABC News on Wednesday, making her the first Black woman to lead a major broadcast network’s news division. Ms. Godwin succeeds James Goldston, who announced his departure from ABC in January. She will begin in her job in early May. Ms. Godwin most recently served as CBS’s executive vice president of news."
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "Advertisement
Supported by
Unemployment Claims Rise Sharply, Showing New Economic Pain
Weekly filings for jobless benefits hit the highest level since July as the pandemic’s resurgence batters the service industry.
Ten months after the coronavirus crisis decimated the labor market, the resurgent pandemic keeps sending shock waves through the American economy.
Though more than half of the 22 million jobs lost last spring have been regained, a new surge of infections has prompted shutdowns and layoffs that have hit the leisure and hospitality industries especially hard, dealing a setback to the recovery.
The latest evidence came on Thursday when the Labor Department reported that initial claims for state unemployment benefits rose sharply last week, exceeding one million for the first time since July.
Just days earlier, the government announced that employers had shed 140,000 jobs in December, the first net decline in employment since last spring, with restaurants, bars and hotels recording steep losses.
“We’re in a deep economic hole, and we’re digging in the wrong direction,” said Daniel Zhao, senior economist with the career site Glassdoor. “The report obviously shows that the rise in claims is worse than expected, and there is reason to think that things are going to get worse before they are going to get better.”
That prospect is all the more troubling because a major element of the relief package signed by President Trump last month — a $300 weekly federal supplement to other unemployment benefits — is set to run out in mid-March.
President-elect Joseph R. Biden Jr. has said he will push a new stimulus package through Congress to provide a lifeline for workers and employers until the pandemic can be brought under control. His plan will include direct payments to most households along with aid to small businesses and local and state governments.
The recent economic data has brought a new sense of urgency to such efforts, with millions struggling to make ends meet even as more job losses could be in the offing.
The Labor Department said on Thursday that 1.15 million workers filed initial claims for state unemployment benefits during the first full week of the new year. A further 284,000 claims were filed for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, an emergency federal program for freelancers, part-time workers and others normally ineligible for state jobless benefits. Neither figure is seasonally adjusted. On a seasonally adjusted basis, new state claims totaled 965,000.
Before the pandemic, weekly filings typically totaled around 200,000.
The holidays may have held down unemployment claims in previous weeks, with people waiting until the new year to submit claims. But several economists expressed skepticism that filing delays were a major driver of the uptick in claims last week.
“I don’t think there’s any question that on the margin, there could be some unusual things going on,” said Mark Hamrick, senior economic analyst at Bankrate.com. “But we have to think also about the fact that these are not our grandfather’s unemployment lines — meaning much of this is done digitally. I think if one just tries to understand human nature, it doesn’t make a lot of sense that someone would be delaying a request for financial assistance when they’re out of work.”
More likely, economists say, is that the $300 federal supplement prompted an increase in demand for benefits.
Confusion over the new federal aid — which Mr. Trump spent several days threatening not to sign — may also have temporarily slowed down claims for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, which fell during the week ending Jan. 2. The increase last week brought the numbers more in line with the previous elevated levels.
Those seeking new work have found diminishing prospects. Hiring slowed for five straight months before December’s outright reversal. In November, even before the recent surge in virus cases, the number of workers officially counted as unemployed outnumbered job openings by more than four million, according to the Labor Department.
And the Economic Policy Institute, a left-leaning research group, says the number of workers displaced by the pandemic is far higher than the 10.7 million officially counted as unemployed in December. By the institute’s calculation, after adjusting for misclassification and undercounting and factoring in those considered to have quit the labor force, 26.8 million workers are jobless or have seen a drop in hours and pay because of the pandemic.
Even with the new federal aid for the unemployed in last month’s legislation, there are continuing concerns about the processing of payments — a task left to the states — after problems with the initial round of emergency benefits last spring.
“States are extra cautious now to get as much guidance as possible,” said Michele Evermore, a senior policy analyst at the National Employment Law Project, a nonprofit workers’ rights group. But she said some states, including New York, seemed better equipped to move quickly this time, taking an “ask questions later” approach.
She said she expected that by next week most states would have “a significant piece” of their program up and running, if not all of the components.
In addition to the $300 weekly supplement and the short-term renewal of benefits for gig workers and the self-employed, the latest round of federal aid renewed Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Compensation, a program for those whose state benefits have run out.
The disparate nature of state unemployment programs, some of which provide as little as 12 weeks of benefits in normal times, has made them a target for Democrats. Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon and the incoming chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, has said he will press for an overhaul of the nation’s unemployment benefits system.
As part of his economic recovery plan, Mr. Biden will seek congressional approval of an automatic renewal of federal unemployment benefits and other aid until the jobless rate falls to a given level. That would alleviate the need for repeated legislative action in times of crisis.
In the meantime, as the coronavirus pummels the service sector, employers are likely to cut more jobs in the weeks ahead. Some struggling businesses may not survive.
“When I look at the situation of the pandemic and the health situation, people are still scared of the virus, as they should be, and that is going to have an economic impact,” said AnnElizabeth Konkel, an economist at the career site Indeed. “The virus is the root of all that is going on right now.”
Still, economists and analysts see better times ahead, possibly as soon as the spring. As more people are vaccinated, cases will begin to fall, which will ease restrictions on businesses and could lead to a resurgence in consumer activity. Warmer weather could allow more people to gather outside, slowing the spread of the virus, as it did last year. A new stimulus package could also alleviate some of the pandemic’s economic pain.
Yet even when the coronavirus does become contained, economists say that an upswing will not happen overnight.
“As we get into the second quarter, the economy should begin to heal,” Mr. Hamrick of Bankrate said. “But clearly, all of this has taken much longer than anyone expected, and probably the healing will take some time as well.”
Jim Tankersley contributed reporting.
Advertisement"
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "More than 40 million people — the equivalent of one out of every four American workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the coronavirus pandemic grabbed hold in mid-March, the government reported on Thursday, an astounding tally that rivals the bleakest years of the Great Depression.
The latest additions — the 2.1 million people who filed state unemployment claims last week — may not be only a result of fresh layoffs, but also evidence that states are working their way through some of the choking backlog.
“We’re still catching up,” Diane Swonk, chief economist at the accounting firm Grant Thornton, said of the newest claims. “The lags have been long.”
The Labor Department report marks the eighth week in a row that new jobless claims, on a seasonally adjusted basis, dipped from the peak of almost 6.9 million — but the level is still far above any other historical highs.
6
million
40.8 million
5
Claims were filed in
the last 10 weeks
4
Initial jobless claims, per week
Seasonally adjusted
3
2
RECESSION
1
’06
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
6
million
40.8 million
5
Claims were filed in
the last 10 weeks
4
3
RECESSION
2
Initial jobless claims, per week
Seasonally adjusted
1
’06
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
At the same time, overcounting in some places and undercounting in others makes it difficult to precisely measure the number of layoffs caused by the pandemic — and in devising a policy response.
“When we think about what to do when benefits expire, it would be helpful to know how many people are actually getting them,” said Elizabeth Pancotti, a research assistant at the National Bureau of Economic Research. While the Labor Department reports may be the best source of information, she said, they offer an “incomplete picture.”
Shelter-in-place orders and business restrictions have been lifting across the country, and there is evidence in the report that some workers are being called back: The number of people receiving state jobless benefits dropped by roughly 3.8 million to 21.1 million for the week ended May 16.
But as Ms. Swonk noted, “it’s not enough to offset the extraordinary economic devastation and job losses associated with Covid-19.”
And while rehiring certainly accounts for a chunk of that decline, workers who had exhausted their weekly state benefits would also be reflected.
Reopenings remain bumpy and incomplete, and flare-ups of the coronavirus continue to disrupt business. On Tuesday, Ford Motor temporarily halted production at the Kansas City assembly plant in Missouri to deep clean after an employee tested positive for the virus. Two other Ford plants — in Chicago and Dearborn, Mich. — were also temporarily closed.
In Thursday’s report, the department offered two sets of figures. One includes the more than 40 million people who have applied for state benefits and is seasonally adjusted. The other includes those who applied under the new federal emergency program called Pandemic Unemployment Assistance and is not seasonally adjusted. So far, more than 10 million have applied.
Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, part of an expanded palette of jobless benefits passed by Congress two months ago, is meant to help freelancers, gig workers, the self-employed and others who would not normally qualify under state rules.
But several economists suspect that there is a lot of double counting and warn against simply adding figures from the two programs together.
Some states, flooded with applicants, were slow to put the pandemic program into effect. Initially, many people were mistakenly told they were ineligible. Others were instructed to apply for state benefits first and be rejected before applying for the federal benefits.
That confused application process has caused potentially millions of laid-off workers to be counted twice. States are also weeding out duplicate applications from frustrated filers who had trouble getting through or did not receive any response after weeks of waiting.
Then there are the mistakes. A data entry slip-up caused Massachusetts to pump up the number of federal claims by nearly a million last week. The previous week, a similar flub in Connecticut mistakenly inflated its total by a quarter of a million.
“It’s unclear if states are including duplicate claims due to error, fraud or the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program,” said Ernie Tedeschi, a policy economist at Evercore ISI in Washington.
But that is not all. That system is also probably missing millions of other laid-off workers.
As of Tuesday, three states had not put the pandemic unemployment insurance program into effect, and several others have yet to report any claims. Thirteen states have not started another federal emergency relief program, to provide an additional 13 weeks of benefits to workers who have exhausted their state benefits.
Laid-off workers who have not applied for benefits and those who have left the labor force entirely are not included in the claims numbers. Nor are any of the eight million undocumented workers who lost their jobs. They are not eligible for any benefits. Neither are new graduates just entering the labor force.
Matthew Wilson, 24, who lost his barista job in Philadelphia, was turned down because he had been working in the state for less than a year.
“It doesn’t make any sense — I moved, and now I’m magically not qualified for unemployment?” said Mr. Wilson, who relocated to Pennsylvania after graduating from Tufts University in Massachusetts last year. He appealed the decision and heard last week that his claim had been approved, but he hasn’t received any money. His partner, who also lost her job as a barista, has applied four times but has yet to collect benefits.
As for regular unemployment benefits, states draw up their own rules and administer benefits. The result is that in some places, like Florida, Texas and Arizona, only a small fraction of jobless workers are receiving benefits, while other states offer much broader coverage.
The way “initial claims” are counted may also vary by state, with some excluding claims that have not been processed.
Laurie Yadoff, a lawyer at Coast to Coast Legal Aid of South Florida, said she had about 100 clients who qualify for regular state benefits but have had trouble filing. Many are poor and older, with limited or no access to the internet. “A lot of them fall into the regular state benefit program, and a lot of them are straightforward, and a lot of them are still not getting money,” she said.
Even when Ms. Yadoff has been able to get someone on the phone, the person at the other end often doesn’t know the answer. “People are desperate and frustrated,” she said. “They don’t know what to do.”
Monitoring withdrawals from the Treasury Department, Mr. Tedeschi of Evercore estimated that by early May, roughly three-quarters of those eligible for benefits had started to receive them.
Allison Hester, who is 50 and lives in Little Rock, Ark., applied for unemployment after being laid off from her job in content marketing at a window cleaning supply company in March, but was never able to get through. “I tried on and off for a month, but our system was so overwhelmed.”
She returned to her job this month. “It feels good, but I don’t feel secure anymore,” Ms. Hester said. “I don’t take anything for granted.”
Nelson D. Schwartz and Tiffany Hsu contributed reporting."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "More than three million people filed for unemployment benefits last week, sending a collective shudder throughout the economy that is unlike anything Americans have experienced.
The alarming numbers, in a report released by the Labor Department on Thursday, provide some of the first hard data on the economic toll of the coronavirus pandemic, which has shut down whole swaths of American life faster than government statistics can keep track.
Just three weeks ago, barely 200,000 people applied for jobless benefits, a historically low number. In the half-century that the government has tracked applications, the worst week ever, with 695,000 so-called initial claims, had been in 1982.
Thursday’s figure of nearly 3.3 million set a grim record. “A large part of the economy just collapsed,” said Ben Herzon, executive director of IHS Markit, a business data and analytics firm.
The numbers provided only the first hint of the economic cataclysm in progress. Even comparatively optimistic forecasters expect millions more lost jobs, and with them foreclosures, evictions and bankruptcies. Thousands of businesses have closed in response to the pandemic, and many will never reopen. Some economists say the decline in gross domestic product this year could rival the worst years of the Great Depression.
And there was fresh evidence on Thursday of the relentless course of the virus itself. Cases in the United States now exceed 80,000, the most of any nation, even China and Italy, according to a New York Times database, and more than 1,000 deaths across the country have been linked to the virus.
At least 160 million people nationwide have been ordered to stay home. Many hospitals are overwhelmed, while essential protective gear is in short supply. “We are the new global epicenter of the disease,” said Dr. Sara Keller, an infectious-disease specialist at Johns Hopkins Medicine. “Now all we can do is to slow the transmission as much as possible.”
The situation in the New Orleans area is particularly acute, with the city reporting more than 800 cases, a higher total than most states.
In New York, the state hardest hit, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo reported a 40 percent increase in hospitalized patients in one day, to well over 5,000. The surge dashed hopes that had been raised a day before, when Mr. Cuomo said the state’s social-distancing measures seemed to be slowing the growth in hospitalizations.
President Trump said the federal government planned to designate areas as being at high, medium or low risk for spreading the virus to guide local decisions on imposing or relaxing restrictions on movement and commerce.
The terrifying speed of the U.S. economic collapse from the pandemic has spurred lawmakers to action. Late Wednesday night, senators agreed on a $2 trillion aid package that would provide cash payments to nearly all Americans and would expand the unemployment system, among other changes. Final congressional approval is expected on Friday.
The legislative action has helped buoy financial markets. A three-day rally has lifted stocks in the S&P 500 index more than 17 percent, including a rise of 6.2 percent on Thursday, though prices remain far lower than they were a month ago.
As staggering as the figures are for jobless claims, they almost certainly understate the problem. Some part-time and low-wage workers don’t qualify for unemployment benefits. Nor do gig workers, independent contractors and the self-employed, although the emergency aid package passed by the Senate would broaden eligibility to include many of them. Others who do qualify may not know it. And the sudden rush of layoffs led to jammed phone lines and overwhelmed computer servers at unemployment offices across the country, leaving many people unable to file claims.
The evening that Elise Quivey, 25, heard she was being furloughed from her job in Chicago as a web designer for a cruise ship company, she immediately clicked on the state’s unemployment benefits website. The pages wouldn’t load. The next morning, as she tried to fill out the online form, error messages kept flashing.
Days of calling have resulted in nagging busy signals. She is hoping that her claim made it through, and that she will receive aid within a few weeks, but she is not optimistic.
“There’s so many things up in the air right now, and it’s so stressful,” she said. “It’s a wreck.”
Despite the glitches, Thursday’s figures suggest the scale of the problem. In a single week, the pandemic wiped out a year and a half of job gains. The past two weeks’ claims alone would be enough to push the unemployment rate up to 5.7 percent from 3.5 percent in February — a half-century low that now seems like ancient history.
The worst could be yet to come. Mr. Herzon of IHS Markit said he expected a similarly large number next Thursday, when the Labor Department releases its report on new claims filed this week.
Some forecasters think the unemployment rate could hit 10 percent this summer, which would equal the highest level from the last recession more than a decade ago. Back then, it took nearly two years for the jobless rate to reach that height.
“What is really hard to fathom is just how fast these numbers are going to escalate,” said Carl Tannenbaum, chief economist at Northern Trust.
Still, while there is little doubt that the numbers will get worse in the short term, some economists remain optimistic that the pain will be relatively short-lived. The congressional relief package is intended to, in effect, press “pause” on the economy, allowing idled workers and shuttered businesses to keep paying their bills so that they can spring back quickly once the health crisis eases. If it works, the recovery could be relatively swift; if it doesn’t, the cascade of layoffs and business failures could stretch on far longer.
Quintina Moore-Caraway, a ramp agent at George Bush Intercontinental Airport in Houston, was at work on March 13 when her supervisor called her over. She was being furloughed, without pay, at the end of her shift.
“They said I could finish out my day on Friday, don’t come in on Saturday, and I haven’t been back since, with no pay,” she said.
Ms. Moore-Caraway, 46, was barely getting by on the $10 an hour she earned at the airport. She has no savings, and no idea how she will pay her $688 rent bill on April 1. She hasn’t been in the job long enough to qualify for unemployment, and the few places still hiring during the pandemic aren’t near bus routes.
“Through all the hurricanes, floods, I’ve never seen anything like this,” she said. “On the movies I have, not in real life.”
Low-wage workers — many of them black, like Ms. Moore-Caraway, or Hispanic — have been hit especially hard by the sudden economic reversal. Many work in the industries most affected by the outbreak, such as restaurants and travel, and few can work from home. They are also less likely to have sick leave or other paid time off, and they have less money saved to help overcome a missed paycheck.
Black and Hispanic workers “always bear the brunt” of economic slowdowns, said Alix Gould-Werth, a researcher at the Washington Center for Equitable Growth, a left-leaning think tank. “Now they’re bearing the brunt of these twin crises, the health crisis and the economic crisis.”
Some help may be on the way for workers like Ms. Moore-Caraway. Under the congressional aid package, most families would receive $1,200 per adult and $500 per child in direct payments. The bill would also increase unemployment benefits by $600 a week and extend how long laid-off workers could receive benefits. And it would waive some requirements for receiving jobless benefits, like the requirement that recipients look for work.
It would not, however, expand the food-assistance program formerly known as food stamps.
An earlier relief bill, passed by Congress last week, provided $1 billion to help state unemployment systems that are breaking under the stress of record call volumes. Departments across the country reported huge spikes in call volumes and online applications.
The surge in applications was a particular challenge because departments were staffed — and funded — for a labor market that had until recently been setting records for its strength.
Colorado’s Department of Labor and Employment had 70 people working on unemployment claims before the coronavirus outbreak. It added 90 people to help respond to calls and process claims on Monday, pulling them off other jobs in the department. Roughly 80 percent of workers are at home, while the rest are in a call center in downtown Denver that during the last recession had hundreds of workers dealing with claims.
“Where we maybe had eight months to prepare heading into the recession, we had five days to respond to coronavirus,” said Cher Haavind, the department’s deputy executive director.
On Monday, nearly 100,000 call attempts were made by 10 a.m., when the call center normally receives 6,000 calls in an entire week. The department put in place a new process under which those filing claims submit their forms at specified times based on their last names. Even so, Ms. Haavind said, the crush of applications has strained not just the department’s systems but also its employees.
“They are talking to stressed-out people, and they are also stressed out,” she said.
For laid-off workers, the anxiety is racking.
Mere weeks ago, Bill Copperfield had steady work installing drywall in commercial buildings in Hawaii. Then he caught a cold and, in the suddenly cautious world of coronavirus, was told not to come to work, meaning he wasn’t paid. By the time he was healthy again, the job had shut down and the state government was telling nonessential workers to stay home. He has tried repeatedly to file an unemployment claim, but hasn’t managed to get through.
“So right now I am three weeks without income and I’ve got my rent coming up, I’ve got food I’ve got to buy,” Mr. Copperfield said. “Definitely I won’t be paying bills this month.”
Mr. Copperfield, 45, has been laid off in the past, including during the 2008-9 housing crisis, in which he ended up losing his home to foreclosure. But even then, he said, he was able to go out and find work as a handyman or even sell fish he caught.
“At least then I could go out and hustle work, even if it wasn’t in my field,” he said. “Nobody can work right now, we’re on like lockdown. And even if I could find side work, I’d be putting my family at risk.”"
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "Red states are slashing federal unemployment benefits as Republicans and businesses complain of a “worker shortage” in the economic recovery from the coronavirus pandemic.
More Republican-led states may soon join Montana and South Carolina in cutting off the extra $300 and benefits for gig workers that Congress put in place amid unprecedented layoffs stemming from social distancing measures that have forced businesses to close or operate at reduced capacity.
South Carolina Gov. Henry McMaster (R) called the extra benefits a “dangerous federal entitlement, incentivizing and paying workers to stay at home rather than encouraging them to return to the workplace.”
Republicans have always said jobless pay discourages work, and businesses always complain they can’t find enough workers willing to accept their wages, but the complaints have been supercharged by the unprecedented federal support ― Congress has never added hundreds of dollars to weekly benefits before ― and the rush to reopen businesses as vaccines spur a return to normalcy.
GOP lawmakers blamed the added benefits for a disappointing jobs report Friday that showed employers added only 266,000 jobs in April, far fewer than economists predicted, with the jobless rate ticking up to 6.1%.
“While there are certainly people that needed access to increased unemployment benefits during the heart of this pandemic, we should not be in the business of creating lucrative government dependency that makes it more beneficial to stay unemployed rather than return to work,” Sen. Roger Marshall (R-Kan.) said in a statement on Friday, accusing the Biden administration of causing a “government imposed labor shortage.”
Marshall said he planned to introduce legislation next week that would repeal enhanced unemployment benefits nationwide. The federal benefits are already set to expire in early September.
The Senate could be headed for a dramatic clash over unemployment, as Democrats hope to reform the state-federal unemployment system in a way that would probably disallow states from cutting benefits as often as they do.
Sen. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.), chair of the Senate Finance Committee, said it’s “deeply disturbing” what Republican states are doing.
“Enhanced jobless benefits helped save the economy by ensuring millions of families could pay rent and buy groceries during this crisis,” Wyden said. “Cutting off all benefits while millions of workers have not yet been able to return to work could cause tremendous financial pain and sabotage our economic recovery.”
Georgia labor officials have been debating such a move for weeks, Georgia Commissioner of Labor Mark Butler told HuffPost on Friday. “It’s being seriously considered,” he said.
Officials in Wyoming told Politico on Friday they were also considering an early end to federal benefits.
But April’s jobs report was not actually a slam dunk for benefits-haters. It showed more than 300,000 job gains in the leisure and hospitality industry and more than 400,000 workers returning to the labor force last month. In other words, people are returning to work and restaurants are hiring in a big way, despite their complaints.
“It may be that so many employers are re-opening so quickly, that it will take a few months to fill open positions, but this is a temporary problem not an endemic one,” Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics, said in an email.
“The disappointing April jobs numbers was due to weakness in industries that we know are or will continue to be very strong, such as construction, couriers, vehicle manufacturing, employment agencies, and educational services,” Zandi said, adding that he expected big job gains in the coming months.
President Joe Biden, meanwhile, called Friday’s jobs report a “rebuttal” to those who say unemployment benefits are keeping Americans from returning to work. He said the real issue was simply that millions of jobs had been wiped out by the coronavirus pandemic.
“I know some employers are having trouble filling jobs ... the economy still has 8 million fewer jobs than when this pandemic started. More workers are looking for jobs and many can’t find them. The virus stole jobs,” Biden said in remarks on the economy at the White House.
Asked if he saw a connection between unemployment benefits and slow job growth, Biden said, “No, nothing measurable.”
Republicans said that when Congress added $600 to unemployment benefits last year, it would crush hiring. Instead, hiring surged and the unemployment rate plummeted from its shocking high of 14.8% last April.
Nevertheless, the war over added unemployment benefits is likely to escalate in the coming weeks. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce, an influential lobbying group on Capitol Hill, especially among Republicans, signaled it planned to push lawmakers to end the jobless assistance.
“The disappointing jobs report makes it clear that paying people not to work is dampening what should be a stronger jobs market,” Neil Bradley, the group’s chief policy officer, said in a statement. “We need a comprehensive approach to dealing with our workforce issues and the very real threat unfilled positions poses to our economic recovery from the pandemic. One step policymakers should take now is ending the $300 weekly supplemental unemployment benefit.”"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "WASHINGTON ― One of the biggest economic arguments this year was over whether extra unemployment benefits made it impossible for employers to hire.
Republican governors cut the federal compensation early, and Democrats made no effort to keep the benefits in place, even though they didn’t agree that the money hurt hiring.
But the past several months have strongly suggested that the extra jobless pay wasn’t holding back hiring after all. The federal benefits fully expired early in September — and instead of surging, job growth slowed dramatically that month.
Meanwhile, there remain an unprecedented 10 million job openings, and some businesses still complain they can’t find workers. What’s going on?
The likeliest explanation is that there is still a pandemic.
Susan Peterson of Fort Lauderdale, Florida, has worked as an adjunct college professor most of her adult life, but in recent years had been working as a substitute teacher. She hasn’t set foot in a classroom since March 13, 2020, when the pandemic shut everything down.
Peterson, 79, said she accepted a position teaching English as a second language at a technical college in July, but wound up deferring her September start date on the advice of a doctor who said she should stay out of schools until the delta variant isn’t spreading as much.
Peterson needs the money. She spent much of her career in teaching jobs that didn’t make Social Security payroll contributions, so her retirement benefit is less than $300 per month. Her state unemployment benefit paid only $89 per week after Florida discontinued the extra $300 that had been provided by the federal government.
It’s just not worth getting sick.
“I like to work,” she said. “I love my students, but I feel like I should wait till spring. Maybe things will change.”
More than 3 million people avoided work out of fear of catching COVID-19 in September, roughly the same number who avoided work for that reason back in June, before the delta variant had taken off. But 4 million said they were sick with the disease or caring for someone who was, up from 1.7 million in June, according to an analysis of federal survey data by Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics.
“There is a long list of reasons why it has been difficult for businesses to fill the record number of open positions, and while the extra unemployment insurance benefits is on the list, it is towards the bottom,” Zandi said in an email. “Sick workers and fear of getting sick are at the top of the list.”
Even as job openings declined slightly from their summer peak, more people voluntarily quit. That shift has lined up with the surge in the delta variant, as Elise Gould, an economist with the left-leaning Economic Policy Institute, has pointed out.
For more than a year, Republicans have decried the federal unemployment benefits as employment killers. Those benefits were first approved by both Republicans and Democrats under former President Donald Trump at $600 per week, and then again at $300 per week, in 2020.
Republicans escalated their complaints once President Joe Biden was in office, claiming that Democrats were paying people not to work and causing a widespread labor shortage. Democrats extended the $300 per week federal unemployment benefit, paid out on top of state unemployment benefits, through the beginning of September in the American Rescue Plan, the multitrillion COVID-19 relief bill passed in March.
“We shouldn’t have policies in place that disincentivize people from returning to the workforce,” Sen. Rick Scott (R-Fla.) said at the time.
That sentiment was echoed by Republicans all summer.
Their claims were backed anecdotally by restaurant and hospitality-sector business owners who were finding it difficult to hire workers, even as businesses began to open up. Republican governors across the country cut federal unemployment benefits short over the summer, refusing to use the funds approved by Congress and arguing that the cutoff would push people back to work and put an end to the labor shortage.
But the states that cut benefits didn’t see stronger job gains than the states that didn’t. And now that the benefits have fully expired, the latest data from the U.S. Labor Department showed weaker hiring and little change in the labor participation rate.
Republicans still say the extra benefits are to blame for the ongoing hiring woes.
“We’ve given people so much money they’re not working,” Scott told HuffPost on Tuesday. “I mean, look at how much money people put away because they got so much extra money.”
Scott added that other benefits, such as the expanded child tax credit, are also keeping Americans home. The credit pays parents as much as $300 a month per child through the end of this year, and Democrats are hoping to extend the policy indefinitely.
“There’s so much money washing around out there, it’s hard to get people back at work,” Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), another vocal unemployment critic, told HuffPost. But he expects the employment numbers to get better now that people have been cut off.
Federal data do show that middle-income households have more savings than usual, which Zandi said is likely a result of unemployment benefits and the three rounds of stimulus checks Congress approved since last year. Most households will probably burn through that money within months.
Peterson, for her part, had to apply for a grant to get her roof fixed this year. It’s not a pile of savings that’s kept her from working these past few months.
“I have less than $300 in my bank account,” she said."
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "President Joe Biden could stop Republican-led states from fully cutting federal unemployment benefits, at least according to labor advocates and Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.), but Biden seems uninterested.
More than a dozen Republican governors have said they’ll cancel federal unemployment programs, which provide an extra $300 per week plus benefits for gig workers, because beneficiaries supposedly aren’t eager enough to take jobs.
Sanders told Labor Secretary Marty Walsh in a letter Thursday that the law creating the program for gig workers actually gives the federal government no leeway to let states kill the benefits.
“It is critical that the Department of Labor does everything in its power to ensure that jobless Americans continue to receive this aid as the law intended,” Sanders wrote.
The Labor Department offered a noncommittal response.
“Secretary Walsh and the Biden Administration have been doing all they can to take concrete action to prevent anyone from falling through the cracks as we know unemployment benefits have served as a vital lifeline for workers throughout the pandemic ― to help them buy food, pay rent and remain healthy,” a department spokesman said in an email to HuffPost on Thursday.
It’s not a huge surprise that the Biden administration isn’t jumping into a fight with Republican governors over the benefits. Red states started announcing cuts last week amid widespread complaints of a “worker shortage.” Biden has denied that benefits are causing a worker shortage, but on Monday, he reminded workers that they’re not allowed to keep their benefits if they refuse suitable job offers.
“If you are receiving unemployment benefits and you are offered a suitable job, you can’t refuse that job and just keep getting the unemployment benefits,” Biden said in a special appearance at the White House.
More than a million workers will start losing federal benefits next month as states cease participating in programs that lawmakers intended to last until September. Many of the workers will simply revert to regular state benefits, meaning they’ll get a few hundred dollars or less per week, just without the extra $300.
But most of the affected workers are enrolled in federal long-term benefits or the special benefits program for people ineligible for regular unemployment because they hadn’t been laid off from a traditional payroll job. It’s called Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, or PUA. Congress created the program as a backstop for regular state benefits, which don’t cover workers like ride-share drivers. They will be cut off entirely.
Here’s why Sanders says Biden shouldn’t let those benefits go: The part of the law that created the gig worker program — the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act — says the U.S. labor secretary “shall” pay those benefits to all eligible workers. In federal law, “shall” is a strong word implying the government can’t decide not to do something.
The National Employment Law Project, a worker advocacy group, wrote to Walsh earlier this week saying the Labor Department must either force states to keep the PUA benefits or pay them itself.
“Without exercising one of these options, or developing their own ability to take and pay claims, DOL will not only cause significant harm to our most vulnerable, it will be in direct violation of their duty to provide PUA benefits under the CARES Act,” NELP said.
Sanders has embraced the NELP analysis, saying that not only must the government continue paying PUA claims, it has to pair them with the extra $300, too. Workers enrolled in long-term benefits, which states are also canceling, could switch over to PUA.
But Senate Finance Committee Chair Ron Wyden (D-Ore.), who helped write the law and has said the Labor Department should explore its options, stopped short of endorsing the Sanders approach.
“We want them to use every bit of legal authority to protect workers,” Wyden told HuffPost on Thursday, declining to specifically endorse the idea of forcing benefits to continue.
In response to the coronavirus pandemic, Congress created the weekly supplement, the gig worker benefits, plus a program for people whose jobless spells outlast state benefits. States voluntarily opt in to each program through an agreement with the Labor Department.
Congress initially added $600 to weekly benefits, which Republicans incorrectly predicted would prevent hiring. After the $600 expired last summer, the Trump administration unilaterally created a Lost Wages Assistance program, giving workers an extra $300 for six weeks. (Congress subsequently added a $300 supplement in December.) Some questioned the Trump administration’s legal authority to create the wage assistance program, but even Republican states embraced it. The Biden administration, at least so far, seems unwilling to go out on a limb to help workers in a similar way.
The law does appear to obligate the Labor Department to make sure eligible individuals receive the PUA benefits, said Indivar Dutta-Gupta, co-director of the Georgetown University law school’s Center on Poverty and Inequality. Someone who gets cut off could sue.
“There’s a plausible case to be made through a court of law that the Biden administration needs to get them these payments through some state agreement,” Dutta-Gupta said."
econ_change of article is: none
###
article: "President Joe Biden denies that unemployment benefits keep workers from taking available jobs, but on Monday Biden said workers had better not stay on unemployment if they’ve had a good job offer.
“The law is clear, if you are receiving unemployment benefits and you are offered a suitable job, you can’t refuse that job and just keep getting the unemployment benefits,” Biden said, in a brief address on the nation’s economy Monday.
Biden’s statement Monday amounts to less of a policy change than a rhetorical shift amid increasingly shrill Republican criticism of federal unemployment benefits.
Republicans have targeted the American Rescue Plan’s unemployment benefits, which affords the jobless an additional $300 a week on top of state benefits through September, as the main driver behind continued high unemployment levels. Several Republican-run states have already said they’ll cancel federal benefits, and criticism intensified on Friday after the Labor Department announced disappointing job growth in April.
On Monday, Biden reiterated that his administration doesn’t see “much evidence” of unemployment benefits keeping Americans home.
“I think the people who claim Americans won’t work even if they find a good and fair opportunity, underestimate the American people,” Biden said. “We still have 8 million fewer jobs than we did when the pandemic started, and for many of those folks, unemployment benefits are a lifeline. No one should be allowed to game the system and we will insist the law is followed, but let’s not take our eye off the ball.”
The White House house announced Monday that the Labor Department would “clarify” current law for unemployment eligibility, which says that “workers may not turn down a job due to a general, non-specific concern about COVID-19 and continue to receive benefits.” That’s pretty much what it already says on the Labor Department’s website.
Last year as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act Congress added extra money to weekly state benefits and also greatly expanded eligibility, allowing employees to claim benefits if they were diagnosed with COVID-19 or if a health care provider told them to quarantine due to conditions making them more susceptible to severe illness.
The Donald Trump administration opted for a somewhat strict interpretation of the eligibility rules, urging states to yank benefits from workers who refused jobs. In January, the Biden administration touted new Labor Department guidance outlining certain circumstances when workers could refuse unsafe jobs and keep their benefits.
Biden on Monday also told the Labor Department to help states reimpose work search requirements that Congress lifted at the outset of the pandemic. Most states have already done so, requiring claimants to certify to the government that they’re available for work and applying for jobs every week.
The Labor Department will work with states “to put in place appropriate work search requirements as the economy continues to rebound, vaccinations increase, and the pandemic is brought under control,” according to a White House fact sheet.
Stricter work search requirements are a reasonable interim step as the economy recovers, said Andrew Stettner, an unemployment policy expert with The Century Foundation.
“I would prefer states to tighten up work search requirements, but leave the pandemic benefits in place until September, than just cut people off altogether,” Stettner said.
The extra federal benefits will expire in September unless Congress extends them. Republicans said last year the supplemental aid would kill hiring, but millions returned to work and the unemployment rate plunged from its high of 14.8%. But now, with people vaccinated and local governments relaxing social distancing rules, Republicans and employers have renewed their criticism.
Business owners are quick to cite a labor shortage when struggling to hire, with some blaming unemployment benefits, but others pointing to factors like a lack of access to child care preventing former workers from coming back.
The child care industry received $40 billion in direct funding through the American Rescue Plan — a major chunk of that in grants for providers to cover payroll costs, rent and protective gear. The Biden administration said new Department of Health and Human Services guidance to states would help get the money out the door so more parents can return to work.
Come July, American families will also be able to benefit from a child allowance-like program through the American Rescue Plan, in the form of an expanded child tax credit, when the IRS will start sending out up to $300 a month per child."
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "But congressional Republicans have said they are concerned that some workers are making more money on unemployment insurance than if they were on a payroll and therefore have less incentive to return to work or find a new job.
“You can extend some assistance, but you don’t want to pay people more unemployed than they’d make working. You should never make more than your actual wages,” said Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.), who said he raised the issue with Trump during the lunch. While Trump did not explicitly say he would not sign another bill if it contained a benefit boost, Graham said “he agrees that that is hurting the economic recovery.”
Many economists fear cutting off the benefit extension could hamper the economic recovery. Government spending on unemployment benefits rose by $45 billion from February to April, offsetting slightly more than half of the decline in private wages and salary, according to a recent study by the Brookings Institution. Republicans have maintained that the higher benefit will give workers an incentive to stay at home rather than go to work, but eliminating the massive cash infusion could further depress demand amid fears consumers are already cutting back dramatically on spending.
Trump’s advisers have expressed confidence the economy will quickly recover, a view at odds with many economists.
Sign up for our Coronavirus Updates newsletter to track the outbreak. All stories linked in the newsletter are free to access.
At the lunch, Trump also implored Senate Republicans to take their time on the next phase of coronavirus legislation to get it right — according to the officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss a private conversation — mirroring the strategy of senior Republican leaders who have argued that lawmakers should hit pause before passing another massive rescue package.
“There may be some more needs out there,” Sen. Kevin Cramer (R-N.D.) told reporters following the lunch. “After we get back, and after the next week when we get back, we’ll take a look and see what we can, and keep focused on the things that are necessary and helpful.”
House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) also told reporters Tuesday morning that he “doesn’t see the need right now” to negotiate with Democrats on new virus response legislation.
The unemployment benefits weren’t the only provisions pushed by Democrats that Trump signaled opposition to during the lunch with GOP senators. The president, a vocal critic of voting by mail, also objected to language in the House Democratic plan passed last week that expands voting options ahead of the November elections, including mail-in balloting, according to two of the officials.
Despite being a critic of the practice, Trump — who is now registered to vote in Florida — has voted by mail, including in 2018 and earlier this year.
Jeff Stein contributed to this report."
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "Last week, Britain voted to leave the European Union.
Well, at least part of it did.
If you look at the map above, it's hard to miss the geographical split among British voters in the E.U. referendum results. Scotland and Northern Ireland clearly voted to remain and are now grumbling that they might try to block the vote or leave the United Kingdom. More dramatic still, Londoners are demanding independence from Britain, noting that they, too, voted en masse to remain in the E.U.
If such a scenario were to play out, as fantastically unlikely as it is, it is possible that one day a post-Brexit Britain would simply be a rump state of Wales and England, missing its enormous capital city. In the spirit of the now-infamous "Brexit" portmanteau, perhaps it could be called "Wangland" ("Engles" might be more palatable, though it sounds a bit too English).
No one is predicting that such a state will exist anytime soon, but it's worth imagining what it would look like. Not only for what it could say about some unlikely future state, but also what it may say about the very real situation Britain finds itself in.
A new geography
Here's the geography of this new country. Obviously, the giant hole where London is seems a bit unusual, but, geographically, enclaves such as this aren't totally unheard of: San Marino is completely surrounded by Italy, for example, and Lesotho by South Africa.
For the sake of fairness, we'd give this new nation the big non-London cities, including those that voted "remain," such as Manchester, Liverpool and Cardiff. Birmingham, the largest city to vote to "leave" the European Union, could be the seat of this new country's government.
Even so, in terms of size, the country would clearly be diminished. The United Kingdom is 94,525 square miles — about the same size as Romania or, to put it in U.S. terms, Michigan. If Scotland, Northern Ireland and London all left, it would be closer to 58,000 square miles — slighter bigger than Bangladesh and about the size of Iowa.
A new population
There would also be a shift in terms of population. According to the Office of National Statistics, the population of the U.K. is 65,110,000, which puts it just behind France and at about 22nd in rankings (no U.S. states come anywhere close to this number, unfortunately).
Meanwhile, Scotland has 5,473,000 people, Northern Ireland has 1,851,600, and greater London has 8,539,000. This means that our new nation's population would be 49,246,400 — a drop in the rankings to 10 million behind Italy and 4 million above Spain. It is also worth noting that London's population has been growing almost twice as fast as the rest of England in recent years. It is thought that by 2024 the city will reach 10 million in population, though how that would change under an independent status is hard to predict.
In terms of demographics, there'd be plenty of change. London is a truly international city, the destination for 38 percent of international migrants who arrive in England and Wales, according to the ONS. In the 2011 census, 81.9 percent of the population across the U.K. classified themselves as "White British," which is fairly close to the figure for just England and Wales (80.5 percent). However, only 44.9 percent of Londoners considered themselves White British. If London, along with Scotland and Northern Ireland, were to leave the United Kingdom, the rest would be 86.56 percent White British.
Politics in this new country may be very different, too. It was widely noted ahead of the Scottish referendum in 2014 that if Scotland left the U.K. (and took its Scottish National Party and left-wing Labour constituencies with it), the right-wing Conservative Party could be assured the majority in Parliament for the foreseeable future. With the Labour Party making up the vast majority of London's representatives in Parliament, the Conservatives would have an even greater advantage and the future of the country Labour Party would look grim.
The anti-E.U. U.K. Independence Party would probably do well, however. The party has little support in Scotland, Northern Ireland or London, and it could well hold more sway in a smaller parliament.
A new economy
Gross domestic product across the entire United Kingdom is $2.5 trillion, according to Eurostat figures from 2014, which makes it second only to Germany ($3.2 trillion) in the E.U. Those same statistics show that Scotland has a GDP of $190 billion, Northern Ireland has a GDP of $53 billion, and London has $563 billion. Thus, the GDP of a new nation without these three pieces would be around $1.7 trillion, which means it would drop from second to fourth in Eurostat's rankings of GDP.
The reality, of course, is more complicated than that. It's hard to overestimate how much London has contributed to the U.K. economy. Although it is an enormous city, it clearly punches above its weight — contributing 22 percent of the total gross value added (GVA) for the entire United Kingdom, even though it has only 13 percent of the population. The ONS has also estimated that Londoners pay more in taxes than they take in from government spending. Meanwhile, the city's economy continues to grow faster than the rest of the country.
When international firms come to Britain, they tend to set up base in London. They have good reason, too — the city is the country's hub for media, arts, technology and much more. Its position as a financial center may be unparalleled around the world: London was recently ranked the top financial center in the world by the Global Financial Centers Index, overtaking New York.
And the economy isn't all about London, either. Another factor might be whether Scotland keeps control of oil in the North Sea.
Exactly how this London-less nation would be able to adapt is unclear. It does have some major economic hubs, including greater Manchester and Birmingham, and it would benefit by keeping the majority of Britain's esteemed centers of higher education — including Oxford and Cambridge universities. And though it would miss out on finance and other service industries, it would have much of Britain's manufacturing industry.
The reality of the situation
Okay, okay, don't get too excited yet: This is far from a sure thing. Scottish, Northern Irish and London-based voters may be angry at the result of Thursday's referendum, but any plot to secede isn't going to happen in the immediate future (with the possible exception of Scotland).
The map at the top of the post may also suggest a Britain more divided than it actually is. In many parts of England and Wales, the vote was relatively even and only slightly in favor of "leave." The same is true in some "remain" areas in Scotland, Northern Ireland or London.
But it's hard to deny that there is a divide. London dominates the country like few other cities in other nations. Scottish and Irish voters, with their separate identities, may have looked to the E.U. as a counterweight to that, but voters in England and, to a lesser extent, Wales (which has been intertwined with England for far longer than Scotland and Ireland) don't seem to see it the same way.
This probably doesn't come as a surprise to most British readers. Fears of London's domination have been around for a long time — a few years ago, the BBC moved much of its operations to Salford, outside Manchester, in a bid to counter its bias toward the capital.
With the Brexit vote, the reality of this is starting to set in. In the aftermath of the referendum, many "remain" voters flooded social media to reveal that they didn't even know any "leave" voters.
Perhaps they're living in a different country already.
More on WorldViews
Brexit campaign wipes website clear, sparking speculation it is hiding its promises
Millions of Brits signed a petition for another E.U. referendum. They shouldn’t hold their breath.
Anger on the streets of London after Britain votes to leave the European Union"
econ_change of article is: irrelevant
###
article: "British Prime Minister Theresa May heads to Europe this week to try to wrangle more Brexit concessions from the European Union.
It won’t be easy. The Europeans have driven a tough bargain, offering very little to May and her Brexiteers. Experts say they don’t think they have to compromise: The European Union wants to make leaving seem as painful as possible for Britain, so other countries don’t try it.
Britain, on the other hand, has a lot to lose.
“No deal is a catastrophe,” said Peter Kellner, a visiting scholar at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and former president of the online survey research company YouGov. “There will be huge impulses, huge determination in Parliament to stop that from happening."
Without a plan in place, the country could find itself unable to import or export goods to E.U. countries. Its planes and trains could be prevented from traveling to the European Union without onerous regulations, as might its citizens.
But the European Union would suffer from a no-deal withdrawal, too.
“Europe doesn’t want a no-deal Brexit because; while it would be catastrophic for Britain, there are European businesses that would be affected,” Kellner said. “Motor industries, pharmaceuticals. There are a whole host of industries where parts flow between E.U. countries and Britain.”
In July, the International Monetary Fund warned that while Britain would bear the brunt of the economic losses, a hard Brexit would cause the E.U.’s economic growth to fall by as much as 1.5 percent by 2030.
“It’s hard for me to see how [no deal] would benefit the E.U. at all,” said Amanda Sloat, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. “By nature of the single market, you’ve got a heavily integrated economy that would come to a screeching halt.”
The United Kingdom is one of the European Union’s three largest trading partners, making up 13 percent of its trade in a bloc that imposes no barriers.
“The strength of euro area-UK integration implies that there would be no Brexit winners,” the IMF said in July, according to the Guardian.
Sloat said that, in addition to trade, a hard Brexit runs the risk of being immediately financially detrimental to the European Union. If Britain leaves without a deal in hand, it’s possible it won’t pay its “divorce bill” of about $51 billion. In December 2017, Britain agreed to pay that sum to cover the costs of leaving.
But in September, May and then-Brexit negotiator Dominic Raab suggested they may not pay up if no deal is met.
Perhaps most concerning to Europe, should the U.K. crash out of the bloc, would be the issue of borders. More than 3 million E.U. citizens live in the United Kingdom, while more than 1 million Britons live in the European Union. With freedom of movement within the European Union, British and E.U. citizens can move in and out of their nation states. A hard Brexit would create major confusion around who can stay and under what circumstances.
Even so, it’s unlikely the bloc will renegotiate any legally binding parts of the withdrawal agreement. Reopening the 585-page agreement runs the risk of allowing 27 individual nation states to readdress their qualms with it.
That leaves part of the E.U.’s fate in May’s hands as she attempts to miraculously find a consensus in Parliament for the deal as it stands.
Read more:
As E.U. leaders gather in Brussels over Brexit, Britain’s May says no to reelection"
econ_change of article is: irrelevant
###
article: "* Send any friend a storyAs a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.,

Prime Minister Theresa May signing the letter laying out Britain’s withdrawal from the European Union. The delivery of that letter to Brussels on Wednesday formally began the process.

Pool photo by Christopher Furlong

LONDON — The world did not end. No recession unfolded. Nine months after Britain voted to leave the European Union, disregarding warnings of grim economic consequences, a nation famous for calmly carrying on has seemingly gone about its business.

As Prime Minister Theresa May on Wednesday officially initiated Britain’s exit from Europe — Brexit, in everyday talk — the lack of disaster was touted by those steering the departure as a sign of little trouble ahead.

“There were predictions about what would happen to the economy if the United Kingdom voted to leave,” Ms. May told Parliament on Wednesday. “Those predictions have not proved to be correct. We see a strong economy.”

But the reassuring talk did not reckon with one significant detail: Nothing has actually happened yet.

Mrs. May has only set in motion the complex, politically fraught divorce proceedings through which Britain must settle its affairs with the 27 jilted members of the European Union. The outcome will almost certainly be costly: Britain has placed in jeopardy its trading relationship with Europe, its largest customer for exports, while imperiling London’s status as banker to the planet.

The markets essentially shrugged. The move was as expected as the next Super Bowl. The pound dipped a tad. So did shares on London’s stock market.

The immediate impact of Mrs. May’s action was to start negotiations on future dealings across the English Channel. Those talks have a two-year deadline. If no deal is struck before then, Britain and Europe would plunge into a state of chaotic uncertainty.

Trade would revert to the rules of the World Trade Organization, making Britain’s exports to Europe vulnerable to tariffs and other barriers to commerce, including health and safety rules.

London’s bankers would be effectively severed from Europe, with many transactions for clients based on the Continent rendered illegal.

Until now, such issues were wrapped in layers of hypotheticals, with the details left for some indeterminate day when Britain’s government would make it real. That day has come.

Though the financial industry has been preparing to move jobs to other financial capitals in anticipation of a messy Brexit, other industries have waited for clarity. Now, they will feel pressure to act — shifting some lines of business to European capitals, perhaps shelving British expansions.

Global banking giants like Citigroup, HSBC and JPMorgan Chase may soon carry out plans to shift thousands of jobs to financial centers in the European Union. Goldman Sachs recently confirmed that it is moving hundreds of jobs out of London while expanding offices in Frankfurt and Paris.

Vodafone, the telecommunications giant, said after the referendum that it might shift its headquarters from London.

“The fact of setting this clock ticking is significant, because two years for many businesses is enough time for them to adapt, but short enough that they have to start making decisions really quickly,” said Nicolas Véron, an economist and senior fellow at Bruegel, a research institution in Brussels. “You will start to see very observable, concrete consequences of Brexit very soon.”

Britain has exploited its inclusion in Europe’s vast single market to make itself a dominant hub for multinational companies as various as aviation, pharmaceuticals and finance. They have set up factories, marketing teams and trading floors in Britain while selling to clients from Ireland to Greece, as if this swath of geography — home to some 500 million people — were one country.

So much for all that.

European leaders have consistently reaffirmed that remaining in the single market requires that Britain accept the free movement of people. That collides with a primary aim of many Brexit supporters — restricting immigration.

After months of pretending that a finesse could be found, Mrs. May in January declared her government’s choice: enter immigration limits, goodbye single market.

Long before this political reckoning with reality, executives at global banks were already mulling which jobs to move from London to other cities in the European Union — Dublin, Frankfurt, Paris, Amsterdam, Luxembourg.

“People will have to move,” said William Wright, founder and managing director of New Financial, a research institution in London. “There’s no other option.”

Predicting how many jobs will move has become a thriving cottage industry. Oliver Wyman, the global consultancy, concluded that if, as now seems likely, transactions in London for European clients are sharply curtailed, as many as 35,000 British jobs could disappear with as much as 20 billion pounds ($24.8 billion) in revenue.

Estimates suggest that as many as 35,000 British jobs could disappear with a split from the E.U. as companies seek offices elsewhere. Some global banks have plans to re-establish jobs outside of London.

Chris J Ratcliffe/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images

After the Brexit vote, Mrs. May met with Nissan’s chief executive to offer assurances that her government would do what was necessary to keep auto manufacturing competitive. Nissan said it would continue to make sport utility vehicles in Sunderland, a city in northern England.

Brexit supporters called the outcome a template for how a pragmatic British government would prevent businesses from abandoning its shores — with tax cuts, friendly regulation and deal making. But if Britain promised anything meaningful to Nissan, it probably violated World Trade Organization rules. Nissan has since said it continues to assess the uncertain economics of Britain. Ford and BMW are reassessing their British factories, too.

For now, Britain has managed to avoid the most frightening economic forecasts.

Before the referendum last June, the British Treasury predicted that a vote to exit could shrink the economy by as much 6 percent annually for the first two years.

The economy expanded by 1.8 percent last year. British consumers continued to spend. British factories continued to churn out cars, medical devices and aircraft parts, many of them destined for Europe.

This month, Toyota announced plans to sink an additional £240 million (about $297 million) into a factory in Derbyshire, though it qualified that it required reliable access to Europe. Snap, the parent company of social media darling Snapchat that raised $3.4 billion in an initial public offering, recently picked London as its international headquarters.

But consumer spending has been increasingly paid for by debt. The British pound has surrendered 17 percent of its value against the dollar since the referendum, raising the cost of imported goods. Investment is flagging.

A weaker pound helps exports, making British goods cheaper on world markets. But exports have also been aided by the very thing Britain is trying to ditch — inclusion in Europe.

Video

The British government invoked Article 50, the provision that starts negotiations on the country’s exit from the European Union.

Justin Tallis/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images

Proponents of Brexit tend to dismiss Europe as a land leading only in the numbers of unemployed men who are moving in with their parents. Britain’s next era is supposed to be centered on trade with faster growing, innovative nations like the United States.

Britain and Europe must negotiate a trade deal that will prevent a rupture to commerce. During the campaign, Brexit supporters argued that Europe would ultimately make it happen because its most powerful member, Germany, now sends a parade of BMWs, Audis and Volkswagens to Britain.

But trade negotiations are vulnerable to the manipulations of politically protected industries. This one seems particularly prone to acrimony. European leaders confront existential threats to their union, with political parties across the Continent hostile to its powers. Many are intent on using Britain to illustrate what they contend happens when a member leaves — nothing good.

“It’s common sense,” said Mr. Véron, an economist. “You don’t allow someone who leaves the club to have better terms than someone who’s in the club, or otherwise the club doesn’t mean anything.”

Even if European leaders seek middle ground, any one of the member nations could hijack the proceedings with their demands while the clock ticks away. Last year, a single province of Belgium nearly scuppered a trade deal negotiated between all of Europe and Canada in seeking favor for its dairy farmers.

In a bid to stake out a stronger negotiating position, Mrs. May has threatened to walk away if Europe does not extend good terms. “No deal for Britain is better than a bad deal,” she said in January.

Whatever the comparative rankings of unfortunate events, Britain’s leaving Europe sans deal would be bad, as economists and people running businesses have said.

It is often said that businesses fear uncertainty more than anything. Mrs. May just eliminated some of that. But she replaced it with an apparent certainty that presents its own troubles: Britain really is departing the largest consumer market on earth."
econ_change of article is: irrelevant
###
article: "WASHINGTON — President Trump, who has called the North American Free Trade Agreement “the worst trade deal” ever signed by the United States, appears to have softened one of the hard-line positions that animated his presidential campaign.
He is set to propose keeping major planks of Nafta in place, according to a draft letter to Congress that lays out goals for renegotiating the trade pact with Canada and Mexico.
But his administration is seeking to add more protections for American products and industries. A proposed provision would allow tariffs to be reinstated if a flood of imports threatened to harm a domestic industry. Mr. Trump also wants to adjust the agreement’s rules of origin, or how much of a product must be made in a Nafta country. And he wants Nafta partners to expand the market for United States-made goods in their government procurement.
“In terms of what we consider to be President Trump’s economic nationalist objectives and what he has said previously about Nafta, the list of negotiating terms was relatively benign,” said Scott S. Lincicome, an international trade lawyer at White & Case.Continue reading the main story
Mr. Trump has often said that the United States could abandon Nafta altogether if renegotiating it is not possible. He has signaled that he wants to move swiftly to reorder the nation’s trade policies, and Wilbur L. Ross, the commerce secretary, said during his Senate confirmation hearing that addressing Nafta would be among his first priorities.
But the hawkish rhetoric of the campaign has given way to more measured statements on trade from the administration that track more closely with the stance of many congressional Republicans, who are avid promoters of free trade and deeply skeptical of policies they view as restrictive or protectionist.
Peter Navarro, head of the White House National Trade Council, said this month that Mexico, Canada and the United States should unite to become a regional manufacturing “powerhouse,” where workers in all three countries benefit.
The tone of the eight-page draft letter, which was reported by The Wall Street Journal, did not echo Mr. Trump’s campaign speeches. Nowhere was there a mention of Mr. Trump’s threats to pull out of the agreement. But the letter, signed by Stephen Vaughn, the acting United States trade representative, did say, “The persistent U.S. deficit in goods trade with Canada and Mexico demands that this administration take swift action to revise the relationship to reflect and respond to 21st century challenges.”
Antonio Ortiz-Mena, a former Mexican trade official, said the letter suggested a softening in tone but also contained several proposals that were likely to prompt a strong response from the Mexican government.
“There are some specific problems,” said Mr. Ortiz-Mena, now a senior adviser at Albright Stonebridge Group in Washington. “But in terms of the language used during the campaign and at the beginning of the administration, it’s not as far-reaching as some people could have expected.”
The assessment that the actual policies of the United States might not end up being as harsh as those espoused by Mr. Trump during the campaign is reflected in the confidence in the Mexican peso. Since the inauguration, measured against a basket of currencies, it has gained about 17.5 percent in value, more than any other major currency in the world. On Thursday, it traded at 18.72 pesos to the dollar, approaching the levels it held before Mr. Trump’s victory.
The Canadian government declined on Thursday to comment directly on the draft proposals, since Nafta negotiations have not begun. “Should notice of intent to renegotiate be given, Canada is prepared to discuss improvements at the appropriate time,” said Global Affairs Canada, the country’s foreign ministry.
Among Canadian trade experts, the proposals were met with relief, but the suspense has not ended. While the draft does not amount to a total dismissal of Nafta, it outlines American priorities that could threaten Canadian industries. “It’s not ripping Nafta, but there are a bunch of sticks of dynamite contained in those pages,” said Mark Warner, a Canadian-American trade lawyer based in Toronto. “It’s going to be a messy, hard-slogging negotiation.”
The letter calls for expanding market access among the three countries and eliminating licensing and permit barriers that tend to stall commerce. It also calls for maintaining “reciprocal access” for textile and apparel products.
Rather than scrap Nafta’s arbitration tribunals, regarded by some free-trade critics as secretive bodies that give private corporations unbridled power to challenge foreign governments outside the court system, the letter proposes to “maintain and seek to improve procedures” for settling disputes.
The draft also makes no mention of currency policy, an issue that many trade experts thought might be on the table.
The administration does give itself room to get tougher. The proposal for reinstating tariffs, often referred to as a snapback, is billed as a “safeguard mechanism” to protect domestic industries. The draft also suggests seeking to “level the playing field” on tax treatment. Such measures could bring objections from Canada and Mexico.
Mr. Trump’s economic advisers have argued that Mexico uses its value-added tax as a tariff that puts the United States at a disadvantage. The president has called for a tax on companies that move their operations to Mexico and try to sell products in the United States. Republicans in Congress are considering a “border adjustment tax” that would make imports more expensive.
American business welcomed the additional specifics on trade policy in the letter. “The details in the letter have whet our appetite for more,” said John Murphy, senior vice president for international policy at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
Automakers and car dealers have expressed concerns that any changes to Nafta could disrupt the strong vehicle market in the United States. General Motors, Ford and Fiat Chrysler operate plants in Mexico that supply models popular with American consumers, such as pickup trucks. Their assembly plants in the United States also rely on a steady flow of parts made by Mexican suppliers.
The industry, including dealers, is particularly worried that Mr. Trump might follow through on the border tax on vehicles imported from Mexico.
Mr. Ross, the commerce secretary, said in an interview on CNBC on Thursday that changing the rules of origin would actually benefit car companies. “The many problems with the rules of origins in Nafta as presently drafted is that in the case of, say, autos, it went specifically part by part,” he said. “Nafta’s an old agreement, and many of those parts are no longer even used in cars because automotive technology has moved on.”
Mr. Trump has been adamantly opposed to multilateral trade deals, arguing that he can negotiate better agreements bilaterally. It remains unclear from the draft proposal, however, whether the administration’s ideas for rewriting Nafta would have an impact on trade deficits. It does not put forth any sort of target or range for the size of the trade deficit the United States would be willing to tolerate. And nowhere is there a mention of Mr. Trump’s threats to pull out of the agreement.
Withdrawing from Nafta unilaterally could be more complicated that Mr. Trump realized as a candidate. The draft proposal seems to recognize that opening negotiations among the three countries will be a delicate challenge.
Mr. Trump would need to give Congress 90 days’ notice before he could begin negotiations, meaning they could not start until midsummer at the earliest.
“There is much to like about it. There are areas where we are going to make suggestions,” said Representative Kevin Brady, Republican of Texas and chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee.Continue reading the main story"
econ_change of article is: none
###
article: "OTTAWA/WASHINGTON (Reuters) ― The United States and Canada forged a last-gasp deal on Sunday to salvage NAFTA as a trilateral pact with Mexico, rescuing a three-country, $1.2 trillion open-trade zone that had been about to collapse after nearly a quarter century.

In a big victory for his agenda to shake-up an era of global free trade that many associate with the signing of NAFTA in 1994, President Donald Trump coerced Canada and Mexico to accept more restrictive commerce with their main export partner.

Trump’s primary objective in reworking NAFTA was to bring down U.S. trade deficits, a goal he has also pursued with China, by imposing hundreds of billions of dollars in tariffs on imported goods from the Asian giant.

While the new United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA) avoids tariffs, it will make it harder for global auto makers to build cars cheaply in Mexico and is aimed at bringing more jobs into the United States.

Since talks began more than a year ago, it was clear Canada and Mexico would have to make concessions in the face of Trump’s threats to tear up NAFTA and relief was palpable in both countries on Sunday that the deal was largely intact and had not fractured supply chains between weaker bilateral agreements.

“It’s a good day for Canada,” Prime Minister Justin Trudeau told reporters after a late-night cabinet meeting to discuss the deal, which triggered a jump in global financial markets.

U.S. President Donald Trump shakes hands with Canada’s Prime Minister Justin Trudeau in a bilateral meeting at the G7 Summit in in Charlevoix, Quebec, Canada, June 8, 2018

Leah Millis / Reuters

In a joint statement, Canada and the United States said it would “result in freer markets, fairer trade and robust economic growth in our region.”

Negotiators worked frantically ahead of a midnight ET (0400 GMT) U.S.-imposed deadline to settle differences, with both sides making concessions to seal the deal. The United States and Mexico had already clinched a bilateral agreement in August.

“It’s a great win for the president and a validation for his strategy in the area of international trade,” a senior administration official told reporters.

Trump has approved the deal with Canada, a source familiar with the decision said. U.S. officials intend to sign the agreement with Canada and Mexico at the end of November, after which it would be submitted to the U.S. Congress for approval, a senior U.S. official said.

Cost For Canada

The deal will preserve a trade dispute settlement mechanism that Canada fought hard to maintain to protect its lumber industry and other sectors from U.S. anti-dumping tariffs, U.S. and Canadian officials said.

But it came at a cost.

Canada has agreed to provide U.S. dairy farmers access to about 3.5 percent of its approximately $16 billion annual domestic dairy market. Although Canadian sources said its government was prepared to offer compensation, dairy farmers reacted angrily.

“We fail to see how this deal can be good for the 220,000 Canadian families that depend on dairy for their livelihood.” Pierre Lampron, president of Dairy Farmers of Canada, said in a statement.

“This has happened, despite assurances that our government would not sign a bad deal for Canadians.”

The deal also requires a higher proportion of the parts in a car to be made in areas of North America paying at least $16 an hour, a rule aimed at shifting jobs from Mexico.

Canada and Mexico each agreed to a quota of 2.6 million passenger vehicles exported to the United States in the event that Trump imposes 25 percent global autos tariffs on national security grounds.

The quota would allow for significant growth in tariff-free automotive exports from Canada above current production levels of about 2 million units, safeguarding Canadian plants. It is also well above the 1.8 million cars and SUVs Mexico sent north last year.

But the deal failed to resolve U.S. tariffs on Canada’s steel and aluminum exports.

The Trump administration had threatened to proceed with a Mexico-only trade pact as U.S. talks with Canada foundered.

“It’s a good night for Mexico, and for North America,” Mexican Foreign Secretary Luis Videgaray said.

The news delighted financial markets that had fretted for months about the potential economic damage if NAFTA blew up.

U.S. stock index futures rose, with S&P 500 Index e-mini futures up more than 0.5 percent, suggesting the benchmark index would open near a record on Monday.

The Canadian dollar surged to its highest since May against the U.S. dollar, gaining around 0.5 percent. The Mexican peso gained 0.8 percent to its highest against the greenback since early August.[MKTS/GLOB]

“Though markets were already anticipating an agreement, one source of worry will be swept away if a deal is made,” Yukio Ishizuki, senior currency strategist at Daiwa Securities in Tokyo, said.

“That will lead to a rise in trust in the U.S. economy, so it’s easy for risk sentiment to improve.”

Trump on Monday praised Canada’s entry into the reworked trade deal.

In a post on Twitter, Trump called the U.S. agreement with its neighbor to the north “wonderful” and “a great deal for all three countries,” adding that the new trade alliance would be renamed the United States Mexico Canada Agreement, or USMCA.

Late last night, our deadline, we reached a wonderful new Trade Deal with Canada, to be added into the deal already reached with Mexico. The new name will be The United States Mexico Canada Agreement, or USMCA. It is a great deal for all three countries, solves the many......

Late last night, our deadline, we reached a wonderful new Trade Deal with Canada, to be added into the deal already reached with Mexico. The new name will be The United States Mexico Canada Agreement, or USMCA. It is a great deal for all three countries, solves the many......— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump)October 1, 2018

October 1, 2018

....deficiencies and mistakes in NAFTA, greatly opens markets to our Farmers and Manufacturers, reduces Trade Barriers to the U.S. and will bring all three Great Nations together in competition with the rest of the world. The USMCA is a historic transaction!

....deficiencies and mistakes in NAFTA, greatly opens markets to our Farmers and Manufacturers, reduces Trade Barriers to the U.S. and will bring all three Great Nations together in competition with the rest of the world. The USMCA is a historic transaction!— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump)October 1, 2018

October 1, 2018

Congratulations to Mexico and Canada!

Congratulations to Mexico and Canada!— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump)October 1, 2018

October 1, 2018

(Reporting by David Ljunggren in Ottawa and Roberta Rampton in Washington; Additional reporting by David Shepardson and David Lawder in Washington and Diego Oré, Ana Isabel Martinez and Anthony Esposito in Mexico City; ; Editing by Lisa Shumaker, Peter Cooney & Kim Coghill)"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "After months of painstaking haggling, the U.S. Senate voted Tuesday to approve a historic $1.2 trillion bill designed to upgrade the nation’s aging infrastructure system by repairing and constructing new roads, bridges, airports, waterways and more.
If approved by the House, the legislation would provide the largest federal investment in infrastructure in decades. It would also mark a major victory for President Joe Biden, an avid railway fan who pledged to restore bipartisanship upon taking office.
The vote was bipartisan, with 19 Republican senators joining every Democrat in favor.
The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act includes more than $175 billion for building and repairing roads, bridges and railroads; $39 billion for public transportation and $65 billion for expanding access to high-speed internet. It includes tens of billions more to improve electric and power grids and make school buses and ferries more environmentally friendly.
The legislation also includes $15 billion aimed at replacing the nation’s lead pipes and service lines, a big part of Biden’s pledge to aid overlooked and marginalized communities.
The financing of the package, which includes $550 billion in new spending, presented the biggest obstacle for the bipartisan group of senators ― 10 Republicans and 10 Democrats ― who spent months working to draft it. They ultimately settled on a mix of various revenue sources — including obscure budget maneuvers, fees, and asset sales — without raising taxes to cover the cost of the new spending.
The Congressional Budget Office, a nonpartisan scorekeeper, said that roughly half of the bill would be paid for, with $256 billion added to the deficit over the next 10 years. That analysis fueled GOP opposition to the measure, especially among self-described deficit hawks.
But the bill’s authors countered that CBO’s analysis neglected other savings included in the bill, such as roughly $200 billion previously allocated to address the COVID-19 pandemic and unspent unemployment insurance funds. The provisions, Sen. Mitt Romney (R-Utah) argued, “don’t score under [CBO’s] rules, but they are real dollars.”
The path ahead for the bill is unclear, however.
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) has vowed not to allow a vote on the bipartisan legislation without the Senate first approving a $3.5 trillion reconciliation bill — a partisan proposal to address the many policies (like child care, paid leave and climate provisions) that Republicans refuse to engage on.
Democrats on Monday unveiled their outline for the bill, a list of instructions for relevant Senate committees tasked with writing its various components. It includes huge liberal priorities such as paid leave, monthly checks for parents, immigration reform and new Medicare benefits.
“A budget should be a statement of our values, and this budget is a clear declaration of the value that congressional Democrats place on America’s workers and families,” Pelosi said in a statement, praising the “transformational” document.
The reconciliation process allows Democrats to avoid a GOP filibuster, but it requires every member of the Democratic caucus to vote for the package, even those who have concerns with the $3.5 trillion price tag like Sen. Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona and Joe Manchin of West Virginia.
House progressives, meanwhile, are flexing their muscles by threatening to vote against the bipartisan infrastructure bill if their Senate counterparts decrease the size of the reconciliation package. A protracted standoff between the party’s two ideological wings could derail both bills and blow up Biden’s legislative agenda, which got a huge boost this week.
The more immediate challenge for Democrats this week, however, is staying united in response to numerous amendments Republicans are expected to offer to the Democratic budget resolution ― amendments that are often messaging bills designed to exploit divisions within the party on taxes, spending, immigration and other issues ahead of next year’s midterm elections. The so-called “vote-a-rama,” a grueling marathon of votes, could last many hours and potentially even days."
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "CLAIRTON, Pa. — When President Trump imposed tariffs on steel imports in June, Richard Lattanzi thought of dozens of his fellow steelworkers who have for years put off badly needed repairs of their cars and homes.
“There was a lot of excitement here; there were a lot of us saying, ‘It’s about time someone is looking out for us,’ ” said Lattanzi, the mayor of this town of 7,000 and a safety inspector at the U.S. Steel plant in nearby West Mifflin. “A lot of people around here were saying, ‘We’re going to be okay.’ ”
Four months later, Lattanzi is less optimistic. Production at U.S. Steel’s facilities have ramped up, and the company announced this summer that, thanks in part to the tariffs, its profits will surge. But in interviews in recent weeks, Lattanzi and other steelworkers said they’re no longer confident they’ll take part in the tariff bounty.
“It’s been a little like watching the air going out of a balloon,” Lattanzi said.
As he has pressed his steel tariffs, Trump has declared that the industry is “being rebuilt overnight.” But the question facing the rank and file is whether the controversial policy — which has raised the price of inputs for many American companies and alienated allies — will translate into higher wages and better benefits.
While the impact of recent pacts — such as an agreement struck with Canada and Mexico last week to modernize the North American Free Trade Agreement — may take years to be fully understood, the steel industry provides a more immediate testing ground.
The initial anticipation of the tariffs, followed by their actual imposition, led the price of the metal to soar. Now, facing less foreign competition, domestic steel companies’ profits are ballooning. And, crediting Trump, the companies are making plans to open up new steel plants and hire more workers.
“The commitment that he has to steel is unprecedented,” U.S. Steel chief executive David Burritt said in August, after Trump visited a U.S. Steel plant reopening in Granite City, Ill. “He’s with us and we’re going to do everything we can to support him because this is not just good for U.S. Steel. This is great for the United States of America.”
Yet the trickle-down effects are far harder to predict. Steel companies, while supportive of the tariffs, have experienced wild gyrations in their business in recent years and can’t be certain the lucrative new protections will stick around. So even in this time of sudden prosperity, some analysts say, they must be disciplined with worker pay and benefits.
Here in southwest Pennsylvania, 15 miles from Pittsburgh, the question is coming to a head because labor contracts governing 31,000 steelworkers at U.S. Steel and ArcelorMittal, the largest steel company in the world, expired last month. Workers say the new contracts represent the perfect opportunity for the companies to be more generous with their workers — who had given up raises just a few years ago when times were tough.
Frustrated by the lack of progress in negotiations, about 31,000 steelworkers at the companies voted last month to authorize a strike. Though there were signs Wednesday that they could reach an agreement, if the negotiations break down, it could bring about the industry’s first major work stoppage in four decades.
The steel industry was already in a period of renewal when Trump slapped 25 percent tariffs on steel imports. Trump acted in the name of national security, though he later justified the move as a way to help the steel industry rebuild.
The industry was enjoying gains driven by a strong economy, high demand to fix bridges and infrastructure after several major natural disasters, and an effort by President Barack Obama to limit steel imports from China.
The tariffs sent the price of steel surging more than 33 percent.
“We have a strong U.S. exposure; clearly we are a net beneficiary of the trade actions,” Aditya Mittal, chief financial officer of ArcelorMittal, said in August, according to Bloomberg News. “It’s great to see the two things come together, the improvements we have made as a company as well as the improvements in the market.”
Trump has repeatedly cited the gains as one of the biggest upsides of his trade policy. After he visited the Granite City plant, video circulated of a steelworker being brought to tears by news of the plant’s expansion.
“Trump has supercharged [the sector] with broad-based tariffs,” said Phil Gibbs, a steel industry analyst at KeyBanc Capital Markets.
But while the tariff boon might provide new opportunities for jobs and boost corporate bottom lines, whether it can overcome longer-term factors affecting the livelihoods of steelworkers remains to be seen.
“Any reasonable observer who just goes on the economic facts will say: ‘This will not last forever,’ ” said Steven Kyle, an economics professor at Cornell University. “The tariff will temporarily make them more profitable. But we all know it could end at any time.”
Those longer-term trends help explain why, even during one of the best periods for the steel industry in recent memory, the negotiations between organized labor and steel companies here grew tense.
In its latest offer, U.S. Steel said it would give workers an immediate raise of 4 percent, followed by 3 percent annual raises later on. By the usual standards, that would be a good deal.
But at the same time, the company said it is wrestling with soaring health-care costs in the long run. The company said its health-care costs are projected to rise to $20,000 per employee by 2019 and that it needs to start asking workers to absorb some of those — namely by paying $145 per month for health care. Workers haven’t paid premiums in the past.
The proposal represents “an incredible value under the Company’s current proposal,” said Meghan Cox, a company spokeswoman.
But to the union, it was an upsetting plan. It would reduce the overall wage increase to just about 1.7 percent over nine years.
“We have done so much for this company, and now they have the audacity to bring before us all these concessions when they are projected to profit $2 billion this year alone,” said Michael P. Young, a maintenance technician at a U.S. Steel plant in Portage, Ind., and a survivor of colon cancer. “I want the company to leave my health care alone.”
Young and others were particularly furious because the work they do can be perilous to their health. Young ticked through the toxic substances he is exposed to while manning the production line, such as hydrochloric, sulfuric and chromic acids, as well as tin, zinc and kinds of chromium used to plate metal objects.
“The bargain has always been that we work in very dirty, very dangerous, very unhealthy places, and in exchange we get good, quality health insurance at affordable prices,” said Cliff Tobey, who helps mine for iron ore at U.S. Steel’s facility in Hibbing, Minn.
It’s not clear how much leverage the workers will have. While at least temporarily protected from foreign competition, U.S. Steel is facing increased domestic competition from steel shops without unions.
The percentage of steelworkers who are in a union fell from 36 percent in 2000 to 24 percent in 2017, according to the left-leaning Economic Policy Institute. Union steel jobs pay more than 10 percent more than nonunion jobs, according to the institute.
Gibbs, of KeyBanc Capital Markets, says U.S. Steel also needs to invest in upgrading its plants and facilities — new types of technologies that require fewer workers.
But many workers don’t see why they shouldn’t share more in an economic upswing. In 2015, when prices were sloping steadily downward, U.S. Steel executives declared “extreme economic times” and urged the union to freeze worker pay. Members agreed.
Jim Borkowski, a father of two, frequently works 16-hour “double shifts” in very high temperatures at the U.S. Steel plant in Clairton, overseeing oven batteries that screech and wheeze so loudly he wears both earplugs and earmuffs.
Ownership “got a huge tax cut, and the tariffs are lining their pockets,” said Borkowski, 33, still gleaming with sweat in his orange flame-retardant pants. “We are ready to get our fair share.”
The coming months could provide a strong indication of whether workers like Borkowski will be satisfied. The steelworkers union said Wednesday that they had seen “significant progress” in negotiations with U.S. Steel.
“We’re still negotiating for a fair contract,” said Lattanzi, the Clairton mayor and steelworker."
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "The United States ended a delay of steel and aluminum tariffs for the European Union, Canada, and Mexico with a proclamation on Thursday.
The proclamation means that steel and aluminum tariffs of 25 and 10 percent, respectively, temporarily delayed for these and various other countries, will now be imposed on the EU, Canada, and Mexico.
Findings of section 232 investigations into the effect of steel and aluminum imports on the national security of the United States were released in January. President Donald Trump concurred in a March proclamation with Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross’s findings from the January reports that included “steel mill articles are being imported into the United States in such quantities and under such circumstances as to threaten to impair the national security of the United States.”
As a result of these findings, President Trump imposed a 25 percent tariff on steel imports. The president added a caveat that countries could discuss with the U.S. “alternative ways to address the threatened impairment of the national security caused by imports from that country.” A similar finding was issued regarding aluminum imports.
Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Mexico, South Korea, and the European Union took advantage of the offer. The U.S. afforded delay in implementation of the tariffs based on the “important security relationship” with each of these countries and pending continued discussions of the issue.
Canada and Mexico were given the delay pending the ongoing NAFTA trade negotiations. Those negotiations have continued, but U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer has expressed at times that the negotiations have not progressed as quickly as had been hoped.
The U.S. came to “satisfactory alternative” agreements with Argentina, Australia, and Brazil to extend exemption while details of those were finalized. The agreements were outlined in Thursday’s proclamation.
European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker responded to news of the U.S. tariffs on the EU, calling the decision “protectionism, pure and simple,” according to the Associated Press. “It’s totally unacceptable that a country is imposing unilateral measures when it comes to world trade,” said Junker, who threatened the EU would soon issue “counterbalancing measures.”
Follow Michelle Moons on Twitter @MichelleDiana.
."
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "President Trump’s announcement that he planned to impose steep tariffs on imported steel and aluminum delighted some blue-collar industries he had championed. “Enthusiastic and gratified are probably understatements,” said Michael A. Bless, the president of Century Aluminum.
Behemoth steel buyers like Boeing and General Motors weren’t as pleased. Their shares fell on the news, and the most obvious aluminum dependents — the brewing giants Anheuser-Busch and MillerCoors — warned about the risk of job losses.
But it is people like H. O. Woltz III who feel most vulnerable.
Mr. Woltz is the chairman and chief executive of Insteel Industries, which operates 10 plants from Arizona to Pennsylvania producing steel wire products for concrete reinforcing. He has about 1,000 workers, most without college degrees.
“The jobs that we have are good jobs,” Mr. Woltz said. “Our guys make a lot of money.”
Now his business calculus is being upended. A tariff on imports also allows domestic steel and aluminum producers to charge higher prices, affecting manufacturers across the United States.
As industrial America sorts out the tariffs’ prospective impact, one thing is clear: The divide between the metal producers and their customers slices directly through Mr. Trump’s blue-collar constituency.Continue reading the main story
Mr. Trump argues that free trade has hollowed out America’s industrial base and saddled the country with huge trade deficits. He has promised to recover lost ground with an “America first” trade policy.Continue reading the main story
But putting America first may not put all American workers ahead.
“There are more losers than winners,” said Monica de Bolle, an economist at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. “If the point is to protect American jobs, if the point is to protect small and medium-sized businesses, this is exactly the wrong way to do things.”
The mills and smelters that supply the raw material, and that would directly benefit from the tariffs, have been shrinking for years. Today, those industries employ fewer than 200,000 people. The companies that buy steel and aluminum, to make everything from trucks to chicken coops, employ more than 6.5 million workers, according to a Heritage Foundation analysis of Commerce Department data.
Mr. Woltz, who is based in North Carolina, counts himself among hundreds of specialized businesses that will bear the brunt of the tariffs.
He pays around $20 an hour on average, and he has been able to increase his payroll despite stiff competition from abroad. If you have seen a bridge being hoisted over a highway in the last 20 years, he said, you probably caught a glimpse of Insteel’s handiwork.
The wire product he makes is not unique, though, and he fears that if he has to charge commercial builders more, he will lose business to foreign competitors paying much less for their raw materials.
“If the customers have the option of purchasing from Malaysians or Colombians, who don’t have to pay that extra cost, that’s what they are going to do,” Mr. Woltz said.
He buys most of his raw material from domestic mills, but he expects them to raise prices as their foreign competitors are hit by tariffs of up to 25 percent.Continue reading the main story
Right now, he pays around $600 per ton of steel wire rod. The impact of a 25 percent tariff would add $150 to that price. He makes only $40 in profit per ton, though, so the math would destroy his balance sheet.
It is not clear yet whether employers like Mr. Woltz will cut jobs because of the tariffs. Economic growth has been strong, and the corporate tax cut will give companies more cash to work with.
“We think the dial won’t move that much,” said Atsi Sheth, an economist at Moody’s Investors Service. “You are likely to gain jobs in a few sectors, but lose them in others.”
President George W. Bush imposed tariffs of up to 30 percent on steel imports in 2002, intending them to last three years, but lifted them earlier than expected after European trading partners threatened to retaliate. One retrospective study found that higher steel prices cost more jobs than the number of people employed in the industry at the time.
In the long haul, tariffs may also hurt the industries they’re supposed to prop up, Ms. Sheth said.
“Even the sectors that are protected over time become less efficient because they have to work less hard,” she said.
But for now, the mood at Century Aluminum is jubilant.
“Finally we have got an administration who is willing to say, ‘It might make a lot of people around the world mad, but if we don’t do it now, then when?’” said Mr. Bless, Century’s president.Continue reading the main story
The tariff on aluminum, prospectively 10 percent, would allow Mr. Bless to restart some production of high-purity aluminum for military use at Century’s plant in Hawesville, Ky., which it partly shut three years ago, he said. He plans to hire 300 people this year on top of the 1,850 he already employs and invest more than $100 million in the smelting operation.
“These are jobs that are sorely needed,” Mr. Bless said.
That is the kind of response that labor unions have been waiting for. Leo W. Gerard, the president of the United Steelworkers union, which also represents aluminum workers, said his members were tired of enduring layoffs because of an onslaught of artificially cheap steel and aluminum produced by “cheaters” in China.
“Some of these idiots that say we are going to start a trade war — well, we are in a trade war now, and we are just sitting back,” Mr. Gerard said. His union represents more than 200,000 Canadian workers, though, and Mr. Gerard said he hoped Mr. Trump would not apply the tariff to Canada.
“We didn’t want to — and didn’t ask the administration to — alienate those countries that don’t cheat,” Mr. Gerard said, citing Canada and European countries among the virtuous.
Economists say it is unlikely that the tariffs would lead to a steel hiring boom. The industry has hemorrhaged jobs over the last half-century, but research suggests that is largely because of technological innovation.
In any case, economists say, any gains would probably be offset by the pain inflicted on smaller players down the supply chain. John T. Johnson’s company is one of them.
Mr. Johnson runs a family business out of Nashville, Mid-South Wire Company, which his father founded 51 years ago.Continue reading the main story
He has 150 employees, who all get a 401(k) retirement plan and health insurance. They tend to spend their careers at the company, turning hot-rolled wire rod into dishwasher racks, shopping carts and bucket handles.
Mr. Johnson used to make a lot of barbecue grills, he said. Then Chinese manufacturers got into the game, flooding the market with cheap alternatives. Char-Broil grill production moved from Georgia to China. Others followed. Mr. Johnson had to find new products to replace that business.
“You can hardly find an American-made barbecue grill now,” Mr. Johnson said. “They are all imported.”
The experience taught him that his hold on the market would last only as long as his price advantage, which would slip away with tariffs.
“When you have a situation like this, that creates the opportunity for these products to go offshore,” he said. If his sales are badly hurt by the tariffs, Mr. Johnson will lay people off, notwithstanding any tax-cut benefits.
“I have to make money to pay taxes,” he said glumly. To him, it feels as if the administration cares only about the people melting and hot-rolling steel, and not those turning that material into the racks at a hardware store or the products sitting on them.
“We are steel workers, too,” he said. “Our jobs and our livelihood are centered around steel just as much as the steel mills.”Continue reading the main story"
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "MOON TOWNSHIP, Pa. — In the hotly contested special election in this southwest corner of Pennsylvania, one issue has universal support: President Trump’s tariffs on steel and aluminum imports.
“A lot of steel mills are now opening up because what I did,” Trump said at a Saturday night rally here for Republican nominee Rick Saccone. “Steel is back, and aluminum is back.”
Even as Saccone and Democrat Conor Lamb have fought over health care, taxes and guns, the two agree that the Republican president’s tariffs are good for jobs and the country.
It’s time to “take some action to level the playing field here,” said Lamb, who endorsed the tariffs as soon as Trump announced them.
“This is a national security issue,” Saccone said. “Believe me, no one wants to start a trade war. This is a very narrowly focused field that the president is touching on.”
The unanimity in steel country stands in sharp contrast to how the tariffs have played in Washington and around the country. Trump’s surprise move has scrambled party loyalties, upsetting Republican leaders fearing a trade war and attracting the support of Democrats determined to win back working-class voters in the midterm elections.
In the final days of this closely watched U.S. House contest, the issue’s resonance in Pennsylvania’s 18th Congressional District underscored Trump’s populist appeal, how he reconfigured the electoral map in 2016 and has redefined the Republican Party.
And yet, there are limits to Trump’s support. Tuesday’s race is a toss-up despite Trump’s 19-point win in the district and millions of dollars of Republican-backed attack ads against Lamb. The 33-year-old Marine and former prosecutor has waged an energetic campaign against Saccone, 60, a state lawmaker.
Privately, Trump has cited the close race as a reason to move ahead on tariffs, and he rebuffed economic advisers who worry that they will kill more jobs than they create.
If Lamb wins Tuesday, it will be a major setback for both House Republicans in their bid to hold the majority this November and the president.
And no matter the outcome, the frustration of the economy’s forgotten prevails in this section of Trump country, fueling a strong anti-establishment mood among the electorate.
Jim Walton, 53, a roofer who intended to vote for Lamb, said Americans have been “getting treated unfairly for years, and it’s been sad. Even Bill Clinton — he was one of the better presidents we had in there — he signed that NAFTA deal that screwed a lot of us.”
The nation’s largest steel companies, based in this district that stretches from the Pittsburgh suburbs to the state’s rural borders with Ohio and West Virginia, have welcomed the new policy. But there is little expectation of an overnight renaissance for the steel industry, which peaked in the 1960s.
Still, the concept of punishing foreign companies for taking advantage of American steelworkers was powerful, and it crossed partisan boundaries.
Democrats and union canvassers were optimistic that the tariffs would not change the trajectory of the race. Every major union, from the United Steelworkers to the United Mine Workers of America, had endorsed Lamb, citing Saccone’s long record of antilabor votes. Workers who rejected Hillary Clinton in 2016 were willing to back Lamb, who rallied with steelworkers on Friday and would rally with miners on Sunday.
Democrats, anxious about the president, were generally pleased by the tariff. Republicans, inclined to trust Trump more than any other member of their party, were overjoyed.
David Podurgile, 52, described a buoyant new mood at his employer, Murray Energy, since the administration relaxed regulations on the coal industry, and he gave the president the benefit of the doubt on tariffs.
“There’s going to be pressure from other countries at the beginning, so maybe there’s going to be a trade war, as they call it,” he said. “But we’ve been treated so unfairly for so long.”
Twenty years ago, 21,100 Pennsylvanians were employed directly by iron and steel mills. Ten years later, that number dipped to 13,600. At the start of this year, just 10,600 Pennsylvanians worked in that industry, down slightly since Trump’s inauguration.
The state’s unemployment rate, at 4.7 percent, has returned to a level where it was before the Great Recession. Steel stopped being the region’s major industry decades ago. For every worker employed by U.S. Steel, nine work at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center; the United Steelworkers’ most recent project in the region is not organizing steelworkers but organizing graduate students at Pittsburgh’s major universities.
“The working class is undergoing a major redefinition right now,” said Beth Shaaban, a 39-year-old doctoral candidate at the University of Pittsburgh. “We’re obviously in solidarity with all workers who may be in those fields more traditionally associated with the USW.”
But the idea of taking action to punish “cheaters” in the steel market is potent — so potent that local Democrats have had nothing bad to say about it.
Sen. Robert P. Casey Jr. (D-Pa.), who faces reelection in this state that backed Trump, commended the president for taking “action to protect our steelworkers.” Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto (D), who once criticized Trump for invoking Pittsburgh as a reason to withdraw from the Paris Climate Accords, also praised the tariffs.
“There is no doubt that if we get a more level playing field, the opportunity to produce more steel is very real,” Peduto told reporters this past week.
Outside Pennsylvania, Democrats in competitive races this November, such as Sen. Sherrod Brown (Ohio), Sen. Joe Donnelly (Ind.) and Sen. Tammy Baldwin (Wis.), have offered similar praise.
Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) has given them, and the president, bipartisan cover.
“I totally agree, wholeheartedly agree with President Trump’s instinct to go after China,” Schumer told The Washington Post on Wednesday. “All of these academics [say] anytime you try to do anything on trade, it’s protectionist. They ought to not let that deter them, but they ought to put together a real plan that works.”
The tariffs have faced resistance from Republicans. House Speaker Paul D. Ryan (R-Wis.) and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) opposed the move, fearing a reciprocal response from other nations on U.S. products such as Harley-Davidson motorcycles and Kentucky bourbon.
Sen. Patrick J. Toomey (R-Pa.), who easily carried the 18th Congressional District in his 2016 reelection, called the tariff “a big mistake that will increase costs on American consumers, cost our country jobs, and invite retaliation from other countries.”
Republicans worry that the extra costs will erase the financial benefits of the tax cuts, negating a potent issue for the midterms.
Toomey’s position is shared by many conservative Republicans who won office powered by the anti-tax and anti-spending tea party movement. The Steering Committee of the Republican Study Committee, a conservative group that encompasses most of the House Republican Conference, said “tariffs on imported goods are a tax on American consumers and businesses,” even if some foreign actors were breaking the rules.
There’s little enthusiasm for that idea in Pennsylvania.
“I’ve worked on jobs where they say, we’re going to use nothing but American-made stuff, and they don’t follow through,” said Greg Firestone, 62, a heavy industry carpenter. “No offense to our friends from the north, but I’ve heard that promise and then I’ve seen the steel bars with ‘Made in Canada’ stamped on them. If he can make the steel company in this country competitive, it would be a big thing.”
Southwest Pennsylvania has seen a political tariff debate before. In 2002, the George W. Bush administration announced similar steel tariffs, a move widely seen at the time as a way to win votes in Rust Belt states that he had lost in the 2000 election.
The Trump administration looked at the 2002 example as the new tariffs were put together. The Council of Economic Advisers presented the president with an analysis finding that the 2002 tariffs led to job losses, with fewer gains in the steel industry than declines in manufacturing and other sectors.
The president considered the advice but said that he was skeptical of economists and their data. He had promised this sort of policy as a candidate for president, and it was popular with his base.
Erica Werner and Josh Dawsey contributed to this report."
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "How Trump’s Tariff Punch Hurt His Pro-Business Agenda
Markets swoon after the president who hired executives, prioritized deregulation and cut taxes takes a protectionist turn
When a key economic input suddenly becomes scarce, it’s called a supply shock: It pushes costs up and economic activity down.
This helps explain why markets have responded so badly to President Donald Trump’s announcement of a 25% tariff on steel imports and 10% on aluminum. Like a geopolitical shock that reduces the supply of oil, it’s bad for both inflation and growth.
To be sure, the direct macroeconomic effect of Mr. Trump’s tariffs look to be slim. Net imports of steel and aluminum are about 0.2% of gross domestic product, compared with 0.3% for oil. Barclays estimates the tariff will add 0.1 percentage point to inflation and subtract 0.1 to 0.2 percentage point from economic growth, for one year.
But those small direct impacts are exacerbated by what the tariffs symbolize for Mr. Trump’s agenda and the broader global economy. By following his nationalist instincts Mr. Trump has broken with the pro-business factions in his administration and his party whose policy priorities have been critical to the upswing in business and investor sentiment since he was elected. By willingly hurting U.S. allies over a problem of overcapacity that is mainly China’s doing, he’s cast further uncertainty over the U.S. role as global leader.
Market action over Thursday and Friday neatly captures these cross currents.
Shares of steel and aluminum makers went up, while shares of companies that consume them, such as automobile, aircraft and construction equipment makers went down. Because consumers are more important to the economy than producers, the overall market went down.
With investors already on edge about Federal Reserve interest rate increases, the steel tariffs at the margin compound inflation pressure. That effect is so far too small to alter the Fed’s calculus, but a tit-for-tat cycle of retaliation could lead to even more inflation and rate increases than investors or the Fed have anticipated.
Mr. Trump says the U.S. needs to produce more steel and aluminum at home to safeguard national security. If so, that comes at a price, just as Japan’s longtime insistence on growing its own rice cost the Japanese in pricier food.
Firms can produce more at lower cost by serving a global rather than just a domestic market. Protectionism shrinks markets, raises costs, and reduces how fast a country can grow without generating inflation. U.S. steel and aluminum companies can meet the demand previously filled by imports, but with unemployment at a 17-year low that may require hiring workers away from other industries, putting upward pressure on wages.
This is good news in the short run for workers, but bad news for any consumer who must now pay more for cars or beer cans. Thus on Thursday and Friday, Treasury bond yields began to discount slightly higher inflation and slightly slower growth.
Because tariffs reduce the foreign currency needed to buy imports they are supposed to lead to a stronger dollar, but in fact the dollar fell in the wake of the tariff news. Investors speculated that the angry reaction of American allies, in particular the European Union, showed U.S. global leadership is fading and with it the dollar’s appeal as a reserve currency.
“If you start a global trade war, the dollars required for global trade activity falls,” said one fund manager.
The tariffs may also lead to a broader rethink of just how beneficial Mr. Trump is to the economy. Mr. Trump campaigned as a nationalist whose anti-immigration and anti-free trade views were at odds with business and establishment Republicans. Once in office, he hired business executives and prioritized deregulation and tax cuts. That is one reason surveys of business sentiment are so buoyant relative to actual economic activity. But that pro-business side is now taking a back seat to a less business-friendly nationalist agenda, which is denting investor sentiment.
It may be premature to predict a long-term impact. The tariffs haven’t been finalized and Mr. Trump could yet soften the sting. China may move more quickly to curb its overcapacity, the root of the import surge and price pressure that is hurting U.S. producers. Yet the decision has generated conflict within his own administration, his party and with key U.S. allies that, at least at the margin, counteracts the boost from the rest of his agenda.
Write to Greg Ip at greg.ip@wsj.com
Appeared in the March 3, 2018, print edition as 'Trump’s Pro-Business Agenda Takes a Hit.'"
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "U.S. Steel has announced that they will invest $750 million at their 110-year-old steel manufacturing plant known as Gary Works in Gary, Indiana, crediting President Trump’s protective tariffs on steel imports.
What was once the largest steel mill in the world will now get a $750 million facelift thanks to Trump’s 25 percent tariff on all imported steel into the United States, designed to protect American industries and jobs from being outsourced.
In a statement this week, U.S. Steel executives said they would be revitalizing the Indiana plant which employs about 3,800 American workers, the Chicago Tribune noted.
While U.S. Steel executives say they are not yet planning to increase the number of jobs at the Indiana plant, U.S. Steel Corp. President and CEO David Burritt said the company is “experiencing a renaissance” because of Trump’s tariffs.
“We are pleased to be making this significant investment at Gary Works, which will improve the facility’s environmental performance, bolster our competitiveness and benefit the local community for years to come,” Burritt said in a statement.
“We are experiencing a renaissance at U.S. Steel,” Burritt said.
That manufacturing renaissance for U.S. Steel comes after decades of free trade policies which incentivized American companies to readily outsource their labor force to foreign countries.
Since 2001, free trade with China has cost millions of Americans their jobs. Between 2001 and 2015, about 3.4 million U.S. jobs were lost due to the country’s trade deficit with China, as Breitbart News reported.
Of the 3.4 million U.S. jobs lost in that time period, about 2.6 million were lost in the crippled manufacturing industry, making up about three-fourths of the loss of jobs from the U.S.-Chinese trade deficit.
Already, though, Trump’s tariffs have created 11,100 American jobs in six months. There have been 20 times as many U.S. jobs created because of the tariffs than those jobs that have been lost.
John Binder is a reporter for Breitbart News. Follow him on Twitter at @JxhnBinder.
."
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "President Trump on Thursday said he will impose punishing tariffs on imported steel and aluminum in a major escalation of his “America First” trade offensive, defying Republican congressional leaders, inviting retaliation by U.S. trading partners and shaking the stock market.
Speaking at the White House, the president said he had decided to levy tariffs of 25 percent on foreign-made steel and 10 percent on aluminum.
“We’ll be imposing tariffs on steel imports and tariffs on aluminum imports, and you’re going to see a lot of good things happen,” Trump said. “You’re going to see expansions of the companies.”
Trump’s move, under a little-used national security provision of U.S. trade law, is expected to trigger legal challenges by China, the European Union and Brazil at the World Trade Organization. It also prompted predictions that it will backfire on American farmers and other exporters.
“It’s pretty much our worst fears,” said Rufus Yerxa, president of the National Foreign Trade Council, which represents multinationals such as Microsoft and Caterpillar. “This is a pretty clear indication that the Trump administration cares more about the old economy than it does the new economy.”
[‘Volatility is back’: Dow closes down more than 400 points]
Trump’s statement followed hours of drama and confusion. The president initially planned a formal announcement for Thursday morning, canceled it amid pushback from opponents, and then finally disclosed the new trade barriers after meeting with 15 industry executives.
“People have no idea how badly our country has been mistreated,” Trump said. “We’re bringing it all back.”
Canada, one of the United States’ closest allies, blasted the step as “absolutely unacceptable” and vowed to respond when the levies take effect.
Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the European Commission, dismissed Trump’s national security justification and said the tariffs were “a blatant intervention to protect U.S. domestic industry.”
He added, “We will not sit idly while our industry is hit with unfair measures that put thousands of European jobs at risk.”
Investors appeared shaken by the news. The Dow Jones industrial average sank 586 points, a loss of more than 2 percent, in early-afternoon trading before closing off 420 points.
Trump’s tariff jab scrambled political lines, drawing condemnations from Republicans and conservative groups while earning applause from some Democrats.
“This welcome action is long overdue for shuttered steel plants across Ohio and steelworkers who live in fear that their jobs will be the next victims of Chinese cheating,” said Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio.) “If we fail to stand up for steel jobs today, China will come after other jobs up and down the supply chain tomorrow.”
For months, leading Republicans have trooped to the White House in the hopes of persuading Trump not to implement his plans to tear up trade agreements and levy tariffs on foreign goods. The president has listened, in recent weeks stressing hopes of negotiating an improved North American Free Trade Agreement rather than quitting the existing deal.
But on Thursday he highlighted the wide gap between his nationalist economic views and the traditionally pro-trade Republican mainstream, going beyond the toughest of the three options he had been presented.
“The President is proposing a massive tax increase on American families. Protectionism is weak, not strong,” Sen. Ben Sasse (R-Neb.) said in a statement. “You’d expect a policy this bad from a leftist administration, not a supposedly Republican one.”
Sen. Patrick J. Toomey (R-Pa.), in a statement, called the president’s decision “a big mistake that will increase costs on American consumers, cost our country jobs, and invite retaliation from other countries.”
Adam Brandon, president of the conservative group FreedomWorks, warned that new trade taxes “could be a lethal blow to all the economic success this administration has ushered in.”
The core of the problem for steel and aluminum producers is massive excess capacity in China. Annual excess steel production globally last year was 700 million tons, or more than seven times U.S. consumption.
All that surplus steel creates a buyer’s market and depresses prices, the Commerce Department said last month in recommending import limits.
In a slap at China, Trump announced the tariffs even as a top Chinese economic official was in Washington for talks aimed at forestalling a possible trade war. Liu He, one of Chinese President Xi Jinping’s closest aides, was scheduled to meet with senior administration officials in a bid to restart a direct economic dialogue that lagged last year.
The United States already has 169 trade taxes in place on various types of imported steel, including 29 on Chinese products. Some of the nation’s largest steelmakers, which sought the new tariffs, also are in good shape financially, with Nucor reporting a $1.1 billion profit last year.
Trump promised that the new tariffs would lead to “new jobs popping up” and spoke nostalgically about the industry. “If you could ever make U.S. Steel like it used to be, we’d be very happy. And I actually think it’s possible,” the president said.
U.S. Steel Corp. employs roughly 30,000 people today, down from around 200,000 in the 1960s.
Trump’s remarks left unanswered specifics about whether the tariffs will apply to U.S. allies such as Canada and the E.U. Several steelmakers — such as ArcelorMittal and Nucor — have production facilities on both sides of the border. The United States also runs a surplus in its iron and steel trade with its northern neighbor.
For nearly a quarter-century under U.S. law, Canada has been considered part of the U.S. defense industrial base, as if its factories were American.
“Applying tariffs to Canada, despite its being part of the U.S. defense industrial base since the 1940s, will strengthen WTO claims that this decision is not really about national security,” said John Veroneau, a George W. Bush administration trade official now with the firm Covington & Burling.
Axel Eggert, head of the European Steel Association, said Trump’s move could cut European steel shipments to the United States by half.
Trump also rejected pleas from companies that are heavy users of steel and aluminum, including automakers and the beer industry, which warned that higher prices would hurt sales and potentially lead to layoffs. In 2002, the last time the United States imposed steel tariffs, steel users blamed the measures for the loss of up to 200,000 jobs.
Steel prices began moving Thursday as word of the tariffs leaked. One benchmark, for hot-rolled coil steel, posted a two-day rise of nearly 13 percent.
The aluminum tariff is forecast to create about 1,900 jobs at smelters — but will destroy 23,000 to 90,000 jobs in other manufacturing sectors, said Jorge Vazquez, managing director of Harbor Aluminum.
Agriculture has historically been a top target for retaliatory trade actions, and U.S. farm groups have warned that this time will be no different. Already, China is eyeing new duties on U.S. sorghum following the Trump administration’s decision in January to impose tariffs on washing machines and solar panels.
The damage to U.S. farmers, especially the soybean industry, could be substantial should China retaliate. U.S. farmers exported $14.2 billion worth of soybeans to China in 2016, nine times as much as was sold to the next-largest U.S. export market.
Other nations also have vowed to strike back.
According to Farmers for Free Trade, a bipartisan group, previous trade spats with Canada and Mexico have triggered crippling tariffs on U.S. produce, dairy products, pork, wine, beer and cheese.
“These tariffs are very likely to accelerate a tit-for-tat approach on trade, putting U.S. agricultural exports in the crosshairs,” Brian Kuehl, the group’s executive director, said in a statement. “Everyone agrees we need to hold our trading partners accountable, but taking unilateral action to raise tariffs carries harmful unintended consequences.”"
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "The Trump economic boom is picking up steam as American heads into the final weeks of the president’s first year in office.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Nowcast, which attempts to estimate economic output based on the latest releases of data, now says GDP appears to be growing at a 4% annualized rate in the fourth quarter. That is the highest level on record for the Nowcast, which was launched just two years ago.
The Nowcast was revised up primarily due to positive impacts of revisions of earlier data, the New York Fed’s website said Friday.
A similar tool from the Atlanta Fed was also revised up earlier this week to 3.3 percent. The Atlanta Fed measure has a track record of being considerably more pessimistic about growth than the New York Fed’s Nowcast.
If the Nowcast turns out to be on track, the fourth quarter will see the economy grow far more than most major forecasts had expected. A survey of economists completed at the end of the third quarter saw economic growth coming in at just 2.5 percent.
Comment count on this article reflects comments made on Breitbart.com and Facebook. Visit Breitbart's Facebook Page."
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "Aug. 20, 2007 5:42 pm ET

Investors sent yields on short-term Treasurys tumbling amid heavy flight-to-safety demand, while stocks ended little changed Monday.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 42.27 points to 13121.35, managing to grasp hold of a late gain in another session marked by broad swings. The index was down more than 96 points at its low for the day, and up more than 102 at its peak. Other stock benchmarks were narrowly mixed. The Standard & Poor's 500 declined 0.39 to 1445.55, while the Nasdaq Composite Index climbed 3.56 to end at 2508.59.

Caution appeared the order of the day for equities following Friday's steep rally on the heels of the Federal Reserve's decision to slash its discount rate, which it charges on loans to banks, from 6.25% to 5.75%. "The market is still bouncing around in a big way, so it's important to be careful and cautious," said Andrew Brooks, head trader at T. Rowe Price.

Trading was somewhat light by recent standards, suggesting many investors are still trying to determine the impact of the Fed's move. "You're not seeing a lot of volume [in stocks]. Today people are just taking a pause," said Bill Nichols, trader at Bear Stearns.

There was plenty of action in the government-securities market, however, as short-term Treasury bills saw strong demand amid a flight to safety in the credit markets. The three-month yield logged its steepest decline since January 1989, according to Ryan ALM, before ending at 3.049%, a plunge of more than 70 basis points. Yields move inversely to bond prices. The one-month bill's yield skidded more than 61 basis points to wrap up the session at 2.347%, its third-steepest drop since July 31, 2001. The benchmark 10-year Treasury rose 10/32, lowering its yield to 4.634%.

"Principal protection is the name of the game," George Goncalves, Treasurys and agency strategist at Morgan Stanley, said. "There's a massive amount of demand."

Much of that demand is coming from money-market funds, which invest in government securities, commercial paper and repurchase agreements, among other things. The funds, which are supposed to be comprised of safe, liquid investments, ran into trouble as liquidity drained out of the market in recent weeks. Snapping up short Treasurys gives the funds an added level of certainty.

Maryann Hurley, vice president at D.A. Davidson, said investors are buying bills "as an alternative to the commercial paper they would normally use." Commercial paper is a term for short-term obligations issued by borrowers such as banks and corporations.

Central banks were meanwhile continuing efforts to calm the waters. The Bank of Japan, European Central Bank and Federal Reserve all either injected more liquidity today or signaled they would do so soon, continuing actions from the past two weeks. Liquidity is the ability to trade assets easily or turn them into cash; many of the market's recent problems have been caused by a drying up of people willing to buy certain types of securities, and the liquidity injections have been designed to restore order in many of those arenas.

"Resolving liquidity issues and repricing or finding fair market value for this volume of debt could take a while, and the markets are going to be jittery until that is complete," said Alan Gayle, senior investment strategist at Trusco Capital Management. "I don't think this correction process is quite complete&hellip; but this volatility and stress creates opportunity" to buy stocks at relatively low prices.

Investors were also trying to handicap the chances that the Fed would cut its key federal-funds rate -- and if so, when that would happen. Fed-funds futures were pricing in a good chance of a rate cut at the Fed's Sept. 18 meeting, or possibly even earlier.

"I don't think you need a lot at this point to trigger a move," said David Ader, head of government-bond strategy at RBS Greenwich Capital. "You would have to see more turmoil in the equity or credit markets&hellip; Or, more worrisome to the Fed in the longer term, would be a downturn in the economic indicators" such as weakness in employment.

The financial sector, seen by many as a strong determinant of market direction recently, was lower after doing well the past couple sessions. Bear Stearns declined 1.6%, while Lehman Brothers fell 1.8% and J.P. Morgan Chase JPM 1.35%increase; green up pointing triangle declined 1.5%. Deutsche Bank declined 2% amid a report from the Financial Times that it had gone to the Fed's discount window. But shares of KKR Financial Holdings rose 8.6% after the company said it agreed to sell 16 million shares to institutional investors to raise $230 million.

The housing industry got some mixed news from Lowe's LOW 1.86%increase; green up pointing triangle, which rose 6.1% after it said second-quarter net income rose 9%, but lowered its full-year earnings outlook because the housing-market downturn is expected to hurt sales. And mortgage lender Countrywide Financial fell 7.6% after Keefe Bruyette said the company can fall back on its banking operations for liquidity, but there's a "meaningful" threat of depositors withdrawing their funds; this, despite a big newspaper-ad campaign Monday reassuring investors that the bank is "well-capitalized" and that "the future is bright."

After the closing bell, Capital One Financial announced plans to shutter its struggling GreenPoint mortgage unit; shares had fallen 3% during regular trading.

Crude-oil prices fell 86 cents to $71.12 a barrel as Hurricane Dean looks likely to avoid key installations in the Gulf of Mexico. That pressured the energy sector overall.

In major market action:

Stocks advanced. On the New York Stock Exchange Monday, 2,009 stocks rose and 1,331 declined, on volume of 1.53 billion shares traded on the exchange.

Bonds climbed. The benchmark 10-year note added 11/32, or $3.4375 for every $1,000 invested, yielding 4.645% Monday. The 30-year bond was up 12/32, to yield 4.980%.

The dollar gained. The dollar was at 114.86 yen from 114.21 yen late Friday. The euro traded at $1.3483 from $1.3491 late Friday.

Write to Joanna L. Ossinger at Joanna. Ossinger@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "U.S. Stocks Climb on Hopes for Trade Talks
Bond yields climb; Dow industrials close more than 300 points higher
U.S. stocks rallied Thursday amid renewed hopes for progress in the trade dispute between the U.S. and China.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average climbed 326.15 points, or 1.3%, to 26362.25. The S&P 500 added 36.64 points, or 1.3%, to 2924.58, led by gains in trade-sensitive technology and industrial stocks. The technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite rose 116.51 points, or 1.5%, to 7973.39.
Analysts and investors said the gains were driven in part by optimism on the prospects for face-to-face talks in Washington next month among representatives of the world’s two biggest economies.
Share Your Thoughts
Stocks and bonds have been on a tumultuous ride this summer. How have you been affected by the swings? Join the conversation below.
Meanwhile, a batch of steady economic data and stronger-than-expected earnings reports from discount retailers also helped ease some of the fears that have been building about slowing economic growth.
A spokesman for China’s Commerce Ministry said Thursday that the U.S. and China remain in communication over possible talks in September and added that Beijing hopes to prioritize discussions about removing the latest tariffs announced by President Trump to prevent a further escalation of the trade war.
“China and trade continue to be a wild card,” said Terry Sandven, chief equity strategist at U.S. Bank Wealth Management. “Clearly, the dialogue between Washington and Beijing is good, but more importantly the timing and magnitude of any potential trade agreement remains an unknown.”
Shares of industrial conglomerates Caterpillar and Stanley Black & Decker climbed 2.5% and 2.3%, respectively. Meanwhile, shares of chip makers including Nvidia, Micron Technology and Applied Materials—which have been caught in the crosshairs of the trade battle—added at least 3% apiece.
“Any news around negotiations starting up or retaliations not happening are going to have a move in markets,” said Bert Colijn, senior eurozone economist at Dutch financial-services firm ING Group.
Stocks have had a turbulent August amid renewed anxieties surrounding trade, with all three major indexes down at least 1.9% this month. The indexes are still sitting within about 4% of their records.
Thursday’s gain for the S&P 500 marked its 11th move of at least 1%—higher or lower—in August, the most such moves since February 2018, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
With an array of apparel, electronics and sporting goods from China set to be hit with levies of 10% beginning Sept. 1, analysts said some investors were increasing their positions in defensive corners of the stock market this month as a way to shield their portfolios. So-called safety stocks including utilities, real estate and consumer staples—which are each up at least 1.8% apiece in August—are the only groups in the S&P 500 on pace to notch gains this month.
“Investors really want to start covering their positions because anything can happen over the weekend on the trade front,” said Diane Jaffee, senior portfolio manager at global asset-management firm TCW.
In Thursday’s action, shares of Best Buy fell $5.51, or 8%, to $63.49, after the consumer electronics retailer reported second-quarter sales that disappointed investors.
Discount retailers got a lift, with shares of Dollar General rallying $15.06, or 11%, to $156.09, on stronger-than-expected earnings.
Investors were also sorting through new economic data. U.S. gross domestic product—the broadest measure of the nation’s output of goods and services—rose at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 2% in the second quarter, compared with the previous estimate of a 2.1% rise. The government said consumers spent more than previously estimated in the April-to-June period, but the housing sector, exports and inventory investment were more of a drag than initially thought.
Meanwhile, U.S. jobless claims rose slightly to 215,000 last week, though the figure remains at a historically low level.
The yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury climbed to 1.520% Thursday from 1.469% Wednesday, while the two-year Treasury yield rose to 1.532% from 1.504%. Yields fall as bond prices rise.
Elsewhere, the Stoxx Europe 600 rose 1%. In Asia, the Shanghai Composite and Japan’s Nikkei both slipped 0.1%, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng rose 0.3%.
Write to Jessica Menton at Jessica.Menton@wsj.com and Caitlin Ostroff at caitlin.ostroff@wsj.com
Copyright ©2019 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "The U.S. economy grew at an annual rate of 2.3 percent in the first three months of 2018, the Commerce Department said Friday.
The results were slightly above Wall Street analysts’ forecasts of 2 percent annual growth rate and represented an expected slowing from the fourth quarter’s 2.9 percent growth rate.
The $20 trillion economy also turned in a better showing than most recent first quarters, which government reports have struggled to accurately assess because of seasonal issues. Financial market reaction was subdued in early trading.
The Commerce Department report was the first since President Trump’s tax cut took effect on January 1. The centerpiece of the tax overhaul was a reduction in corporate taxes aimed at boosting investment and jobs. So far, the results are mixed. The Commerce Department report showed a robust contribution from business investment, which rose more than 6 percent.
That seemed at odds with Thursday’s Census Bureau report that nondefense capital goods orders, excluding aircraft, fell 0.1 percent in March and that preliminary results from earlier months had been revised lower.
Weakness in the GDP report also was evident in government outlays and consumer spending, which slowed to a 1.1 percent gain from 4 percent in the final quarter of 2017. Slumping auto sales were a major contributor.
“The trend is probably better than what you’re seeing,” said economist Jim O’Sullivan of High-Frequency Economics. “Quarterly data are volatile. You never want to get too caught up in a single number.”
Gains from the tax cut are likely to be stronger in the second quarter as adjusted individual withholding allowances take full effect and tax refunds hit taxpayers’ bank accounts, O’Sullivan said.
Higher federal government spending also will make its mark with O’Sullivan expecting a second-quarter rebound to an annual rate of 3.7 percent.
Commerce Department analysts reported worrying signs of rising prices with a key price index, excluding volatile food and energy costs, rising 2.5 percent. That was the fastest pace since 2011 and it comes as Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell is trying to prevent the economy from growing so fast that it sparks a spiral of rising prices. The Fed, which wants to keep price increases to about 2 percent annually, raised short-term interest rates in March for the sixth time since 2015 when they were near zero.
“With clear signs that inflation is rising pretty rapidly now, the Fed will need to tighten more aggressively this year and that will lay the seeds for an economic slowdown starting next year,” economist Paul Ashworth of Capital Economics told clients.
Amid signs of labor market buoyancy, the Fed also raised its forecast, predicting the economy would grow this year at an annual rate of 2.7 percent, up from 2.5 percent in December. Employers around the country are reporting difficulty finding skilled workers with the unemployment rate at 4.1 percent and headed lower. First-time claims for unemployment insurance fell to 209,000 in the week through April 21, the lowest level since 1969.
“The Trump administration can stop looking for ways to bring jobs to America because almost everyone out there in the country who has a heartbeat has found employment already,” economist Chris Rupkey of MUFG Union Bank told clients in a research note Thursday.
The economy is steaming ahead despite worries over a potential trade war with China. The Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank manufacturing index rose sharply in April amid optimism about future orders. “Factory activity accelerated in April despite concerns among many firms about changes in international trade policy,” said economist Chad Wilkerson of the Kansas City Fed.
Since the expansion began nearly nine years ago, first-quarter economic growth has averaged just a 1.2 percent annual rate, less than half as fast as the other quarters, according to O’Sullivan of High-Frequency Economics.
Economists say that repeated economic softness in the early months of the year may be due to seasonal adjustment issues with government data. In July, the Bureau of Economic Analysis is scheduled to overhaul its approach to economic scorekeeping for the first time since 2013, in part, to take account of those concerns."
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "So much for the idea that the economy is close to overheating.
A lower than expected retail sales number Wednesday has many economists revising down their forecast of first-quarter gross domestic product (GDP).
The Atlanta Fed’s GDPNow estimate fell to 1.9 percent, down from 2.5 percent just five days ago. At the start of February, the Atlanta Fed’s estimate called for GDP growth above 5 percent.
Economists at JP Morgan lowered their estimate to 2.0 percent, down from 2.5 percent. Goldman Sachs lowered its estimate from 2 percent to 1.8 percent.
U.S. retail sales fell for a third consecutive month in February, according to data released Wednesday by the Commerce Department. Economists had forecast a month-over-month gain of 0.3 percent in February. Instead, sales fell by 0.1 percent.
January’s decline, however, was revised to 0.1 percent, up from the initial read of 0.3 percent.
The decline was driven by a fall in purchases of big-ticket items such as cars and building materials.
Consumer spending appears to have slowed at the start of the year, after growing a 3.8 percent annualized rate in the fourth quarter. The slowdown suggests that those who warned the Trump tax cuts could cause the economy to overheat were off-track. If anything, it now appears that the tax cuts will give the economy a needed boost.
Comment count on this article reflects comments made on Breitbart.com and Facebook. Visit Breitbart's Facebook Page."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "The American economy is on track to deliver its strongest sustained growth in thirteen years.
The latest readings of gross domestic product see the economy growing at well above three percent in the final quarter of 2017. The GDPNOW predictor run by the Atlanta Fed forecasts 3.3 percent GDP growth. The New York Fed’s Nowcast forecasts 3.9 percent growth.
Despite the wide gap between the two readings of the economy, both agree that we appear to be growing at a rate above 3 percent. If that happens, it will be the third consecutive quarter of better than three percent growth. That’s something that has not happened since 2005.
Mainstream journalists and economists are starting to take notice. CNBC’s Patti Domm reports:
Economists in CNBC/Moody’s Analytics Survey upped their median fourth-quarter GDP forecast Friday by a median 0.4 to 3 percent. NatWest Markets raised fourth-quarter GDP to 3.5 percent from 2.7 percent, based on a stronger view of the consumer, and the Atlanta Fed GDPNow shows fourth-quarter growth now at a pace of 3.3 percent, from 2.8 percent earlier in the week.
When the White House said it expected 3 percent growth, economists were skeptical and many growth forecasts held to growth in the 2 percent range.
The first official reading of fourth quarter GDP will be revealed on January 26. Growth was 3.1 percent in the second quarter of 2017 and 3.2 percent in the third quarter.
Comment count on this article reflects comments made on Breitbart.com and Facebook. Visit Breitbart's Facebook Page."
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "Businesses slash investment, exports tumble and consumers show caution as GDP expands at 0.2% pace

Updated April 29, 2015 2:45 pm ET

WASHINGTON—The U.S. economy slowed to a crawl at the start of the year as businesses slashed investment, exports tumbled and consumers showed signs of caution, marking a return to the uneven growth that has been a hallmark of the nearly six-year economic expansion.

Gross domestic product, the broadest measure of goods and services produced across the economy, expanded at a 0.2% seasonally adjusted annual rate in the first quarter, the Commerce Department said Wednesday. The economy advanced at a 2.2% pace in the fourth quarter and 5% in the third.

Economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal had expected growth of 1% in the first three months of this year, though many were braced for a surprise to the downside.

The latest reading on the economy came hours before Federal Reserve officials released their policy statement, in which they said slower growth reflected, in part, “transitory factors.” The Fed gave no new explicit clues on the timing of interest-rate increases, but the slower growth made the timing a bit more uncertain.

The first-quarter figures repeat a common pattern in recent years: one or two strong readings followed by a sharp slowdown. First-quarter GDP growth had averaged 0.6% since 2010 and 2.9% for all other quarters. That has worked out to moderate overall expansion but no growth breakout.

“This is another quarterly number which confirms the long-term slow-growth thesis, but there are good odds we get a bit of a bounce later in the year from stabilized business spending and the housing markets, which are setting up quite promising,” Guy LeBas, chief fixed-income strategist at Janney Montgomery Scott, said in a note to clients.

Last year, economists pinned much of the blame for a bad first quarter—GDP shrank 2.1%—on unusually harsh weather. This year, multiple factors appear to be at work, including another bout of blizzards, disruptions at West Coast ports, the stronger dollar’s effect on exports and the impact of cheaper oil.

Better weather, a return to normal at port terminals and steadying investment could boost growth later this year.

“We expect the economy will rebound in [the second quarter] and beyond, similar to last year,” said Michelle Girard, economist at RBS Securities.

But not all the factors behind the slowdown appear temporary. A stronger dollar and cheaper oil could persist, keeping exports and energy-sector investment at bay.

As well, rising inventories kept the U.S. economy out of recession, contributing 0.74 percentage point to GDP in the first quarter. A second-quarter repeat is unlikely.

Joseph LaVorgna, chief U.S. economist at Deutsche Bank, said producers probably will allow inventory positions to run off rather than building them up even more. “This tells us that current-quarter growth is likely to run around 2.5%, not the 4% snapback we had previously been anticipating,” he said.

U.S. households will have to pick up spending to help the economy grow. Wednesday’s report showed consumer spending, which accounts for more than two-thirds of economic output, decelerated to a 1.9% pace in the first quarter, down from 4.4% growth in the fourth quarter.

Rather than using savings from cheaper gasoline to buy more goods and services, Americans have been setting money aside for a rainy day. The personal saving rate at 5.5% in the first quarter was the highest since 2012. The figure was 4.6% in the fourth quarter.

Another key driver of the economy, business spending, also has faltered of late. Nonresidential fixed investment—which reflects spending on software, research and development, equipment and structures—retreated at a 3.4% rate, compared with a 4.7% rise in the fourth quarter.

Energy companies in particular are feeling the effects of cheaper oil. Business investment in structures fell 23.1%, led by a 48.7% contraction for mining sector spending on shafts and wells, Commerce said.

A stronger dollar, meanwhile, has made domestically produced goods more expensive overseas and foreign products cheaper inside the U.S. Combined with disruptions at West Coast ports, trade was constrained. In the first quarter, exports fell at a 7.2% rate, compared with 4.5% growth in the fourth quarter. Imports rose 1.8%, compared with 10.4% in the fourth quarter.

Federal government spending added little to the economy in the first quarter, expanding 0.3%, compared with a 7.3% fall in the fourth quarter.

Real final sales of domestic product, a measure that excludes changes to inventories, shrank at a 0.5% pace, compared with a 2.3% rise in the fourth quarter.

Alongside weak growth in the quarter, prices fell.

The price index for personal consumption expenditures—the Fed’s preferred measure for inflation—declined at a 2% annual rate, well below the central bank’s 2% inflation growth target. Core prices, which exclude volatile food and energy components, were up 0.9%, the lowest level since 2010.

Write to Jeffrey Sparshott at jeffrey.sparshott@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "U.S. Economy Returned to Growth in Third Quarter
Gross domestic product increased 0.6 percent after two quarters of decline, but key components continue to show an economic slowdown.
This article is part of our Daily Business Briefing
The U.S. economy grew slowly over the summer, adding to fears of a looming recession — but also keeping alive the hope that one might be avoided.
Gross domestic product, adjusted for inflation, returned to growth in the third quarter after two consecutive quarterly contractions, according to government data released Thursday. But consumer spending slowed as inflation ate away at households’ buying power, and the sharp rise in interest rates led to the steepest contraction in the housing sector since the first months of the pandemic.
The report underscored the delicate balance facing the Federal Reserve as it tries to rein in the fastest inflation in four decades. Policymakers have aggressively raised interest rates in recent months — and are expected to do so again at their meeting next week — in an effort to cool off red-hot demand, which they believe has contributed to the rapid increase in prices. But they are trying to do so without snuffing out the recovery entirely.
The third-quarter data — G.D.P. rose 0.6 percent, the Commerce Department said, a 2.6 percent annual rate of growth — suggested that the path to such a “soft landing” remained open, but narrow.
“It’s good that the economy is not collapsing,” said Carola Frydman, an economist at Northwestern University. “To the extent that we manage growth that’s below trend, but not a complete collapse in consumption and investment, that would be the ideal scenario.”
Inflation F.A.Q.
What is inflation? Inflation is a loss of purchasing power over time, meaning your dollar will not go as far tomorrow as it did today. It is typically expressed as the annual change in prices for everyday goods and services such as food, furniture, apparel, transportation and toys.
President Biden cheered the report in a statement Thursday morning. “For months, doomsayers have been arguing that the U.S. economy is in a recession, and congressional Republicans have been rooting for a downturn,” he said. “But today we got further evidence that our economic recovery is continuing to power forward.”
By one common definition, the U.S. economy entered a recession when it experienced two straight quarters of shrinking G.D.P. at the start of the year. Officially, however, recessions are determined by a group of researchers at the National Bureau of Economic Research, who look at a broader array of indicators, including employment, income and spending.
Most analysts don’t believe the economy meets that more formal definition, and the third-quarter numbers — which slightly exceeded forecasters’ expectations — provided further evidence that a recession had not yet begun.
But the overall G.D.P. figures were skewed by the international trade component, which often exhibits big swings from one period to the next. Economists tend to focus on less volatile components, which have showed the recovery steadily losing momentum as the year has progressed. One closely watched measure suggested that private-sector demand stalled out almost completely in the third quarter.
“Ignore the headline number — growth rates are slowing,” said Michael Gapen, chief U.S. economist for Bank of America. “It wouldn’t take much further slowing from here to tip the economy into a recession.”
Consumer spending, the bedrock of the U.S. economy, rose 0.4 percent in the third quarter, down from a 0.5 percent increase in the quarter before. Spending on goods fell for the third consecutive quarter, while spending on services slowed but remained positive.
Consumer spending has continued to increase despite higher interest rates and rising prices, as consumers have drawn down savings to keep spending on vacations, restaurant meals and other in-person activities that many missed out on earlier in the pandemic. But it is unclear how long that can last. Americans saved 3.3 percent of their after-tax income in the third quarter, the smallest share since 2007.
“‘Borrowed time’ is how I would describe the consumer right now,” said Tim Quinlan, senior economist at Wells Fargo. “Credit card borrowing is up, saving is down, our costs are rising faster than our paychecks are.”
Understand Inflation and How It Affects You
- Inflation Calculator: How you experience inflation can vary greatly depending on your spending habits. Answer these seven questions to estimate your personal inflation rate.
- Tax Rates: The I.R.S. has made inflation adjustments for 2023, which could push many people into a lower tax bracket and reduce tax bills.
- Your Paycheck: Inflation is taking a bigger and bigger bite out of your wallet. Now, it’s going to affect the size of your paycheck next year.
- Cost of Living: As food prices rise, eating is becoming increasingly expensive. We took a close look at five New Yorkers’ food and drink habits to see where the effects are most felt.
Inflation slowed in the third quarter, as oil prices fell. That led to an increase in inflation-adjusted personal income, after a decline in the second quarter. But oil prices have since rebounded somewhat, and prices for food, rent and other essentials continue to rise.
The impact of rising interest rates is clear in the housing market, where home building and sales have both slowed sharply in recent months. The housing sector shrank 7.4 percent in the third quarter, subtracting 1.4 percentage points from the annualized growth rate in overall G.D.P. Businesses also cut investments in commercial and industrial buildings, and separate data released Thursday showed that a key measure of business investment fell in September.
The slowdown in housing is likely to lead to a further pullback in consumer spending as homeowners feel poorer and as fewer people buy homes and need to fill them with furniture and appliances. Mortgage rates passed 7 percent on Thursday, their highest level since 2002.
“Housing is just the single largest trigger to additional spending, and it’s not there anymore; it’s going in reverse,” said Diane Swonk, chief economist at the accounting firm KPMG. “This has been a stunning turnaround in housing, and when things start to go really quickly, you start to wonder, what are the knock-on effects, what are the spillover effects?”
The third quarter was in some sense a mirror image of the first quarter, when G.D.P. shrank but consumer spending was strong. In both cases, the swings were driven by international trade. Imports, which don’t count toward domestic production figures, soared early this year as the strong economic recovery led Americans to buy more goods from overseas. Exports slumped as the rest of the world recovered more slowly from the pandemic.
Both trends have begun to reverse as American consumers have shifted more of their spending toward services and away from imported goods, and as foreign demand for American-made goods has recovered. Supply-chain disruptions have added to the volatility, leading to big swings in the data from quarter to quarter.
Few economists expect the strong trade figures from the third quarter to continue, especially because the strong dollar will make American goods less attractive overseas.
Jim Tankersley contributed reporting."
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "U.S. Economy Roars Back, Grew 2.9% in Third Quarter
Growth rate was the fastest recorded in two years after expanding an anemic 1.4% in the second quarter
WASHINGTON—U.S. economic growth accelerated last quarter, easing fears of a near-term slowdown but doing little to change the trajectory of a long but weak expansion.
Gross domestic product, a broad measure of goods and services produced across the economy, expanded at an inflation- and seasonally adjusted 2.9% annual rate in the third quarter, the Commerce Department said Friday. That was stronger growth than the second quarter’s pace of 1.4%. Economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal expected growth at a 2.5% pace for the July-to-September period.
Last quarter’s growth rate was the fastest recorded in two years.
The third-quarter acceleration largely reflected increased exports and a buildup of inventories, while consumer spending increased at a slower rate.
The latest data “do not point towards a new growth path but rather a strong rebound following one year of soggy growth,” said Joseph Brusuelas, chief economist at consulting firm RSM US.
Friday’s data also gave voters their last comprehensive look at the economy’s health before the November election.
The improvement could give Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton more latitude to position herself as the candidate to continue Obama administration policies that have led to a long expansion. Still, the most recent gain comes in the weakest expansion in recent memory, a point Republican candidate Donald Trump makes frequently.
Since the recession ended in mid-2009 the economy has grown at roughly a 2% annual rate, making the current expansion the weakest on records back to 1949.
Federal Reserve policy makers are likely to hold the central bank’s benchmark interest rate steady when they meet next week, but improved output gains could support the first increase in a year at their December meeting.
“Acceleration in growth in the third quarter, as well as continued improvement in the labor market and indications of higher inflation,” will lead the Fed “to boost the federal funds” in December, PNC Financial Services economists wrote in a note Friday.
The third-quarter GDP report showed consumer-spending gains slowed after a strong advance this spring. Personal-consumption expenditures rose at a 2.1% pace in the third quarter compared with a 4.3% gain during the prior period. Spending on long-lasting durable goods such as cars and appliances rose grew at better than 9% in the past two quarters.
Consumer spending accounts for about two-thirds of total output.
Exports, which add to GDP, increased at a 10% rate in the third quarter, the best gain in nearly three years. Export gains had slumped over the prior year and half, in part because a stronger dollar made U.S. good more expensive overseas. But separate data suggested that shipments of agricultural products, especially soybeans, supported the latest gain.
“Some of that surge was due to a one-off spike in soybean exports,” said Paul Ashworth, chief U.S. economist at Capital Economics. “But it is still a welcome sign that the dollar appreciation in 2014 and 2015 is no longer weighing on exporters.”
Imports, which subtract from domestic output, increased at a 2.3% rate. In total, trade contributed 0.83 percentage point to overall growth.
The change in private inventories, a drag on output the five previous quarters, contributed 0.61 percentage point to the overall growth rate in the third quarter. An increase in stockpiles could indicate businesses are more confident in future demand.
A measure of economic growth that excludes inventory effects, real final sales of domestic product, rose at a 2.3% pace in the third quarter, a slight slowdown compared with a 2.6% increase in the second quarter.
A measure of business spending, nonresidential fixed investment, rose at a 1.2% rate versus the prior quarter’s 1% advance. Firms increased spending on building structures, but reduced outlays on equipment for the fourth straight quarter. Spending on intellectual property, including research and development and software, advanced at a slower pace than in the prior quarter.
Rapid sales growth at Proto Labs Inc. slowed over the past year, particularly for clients tied to industrial equipment and commodities, said Chief Executive Officer Vicki Holt. The Maple Plain, Minn., manufacturer uses 3-D printing to create prototypes. “There’s just some cautiousness that I feel in the environment,” she said. “An increased number of customers tell us the reason they haven’t bought yet is because projects have been delayed or canceled.”
Spending on home building and improvements fell for the second straight quarter. Residential fixed investment declined at a 6.2% pace in the third quarter. Until this spring, residential investment had been a driver of economic growth since mid-2014.
Government spending advanced at a 0.5% rate last quarter, with stronger federal spending offsetting a decline at the state and local level.
The latest data suggests the economy this year isn’t likely to top 2015’s 2.6% growth rate, the best annual reading of the expansion. The economy has failed to grow better than a 3% in any year since 2005, and many economists expect such growth will remain a rarity. The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office projects GDP to grow at around 2% annually through 2026. Federal Reserve policy makers have pegged longer-run output gains at a 1.8% annual rate.
And while output advanced at a quicker rate last quarter, hiring was also stronger than in the second quarter. That could restrain improvement in worker productivity. Worker productivity has decreased for three straight quarters, through the midpoint of this year, and has been weak for much of the expansion. Productivity is a key ingredient in determining future growth in wages, prices and overall economic output.
Friday’s report showed inflation pressures eased during the summer.
The price index for personal-consumption expenditures rose at a 1.4% seasonally adjusted annual rate in the third quarter from the second. Consumer prices rose at a 2% rate during the second quarter. When excluding volatile food and energy costs, the price index increased at a 1.7% rate in the third quarter.
Corrections & Amplifications:
The gross domestic product report was released on Friday. An earlier version of this article online incorrectly stated the report came out on Thursday. (10/28)
Write to Eric Morath at eric.morath@wsj.com"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "This Year’s Selloff in Chinese Markets Isn’t Like 2015. It Looks Worse.
Several signs suggest that investors are responding rationally to signs of fundamental problems for China’s economy
SHANGHAI—This year’s selloff in China’s stocks and currency is reviving painful memories of the country’s last market rout, in the summer of 2015. If anything, things look more worrying this time around.
Shares in Shanghai are the world’s worst performing among major markets this year, tumbling 17%. The yuan has slumped 3.6% against the dollar since the start of June, pushed down by a combination of selling by nervous investors and the Chinese central bank’s efforts to guide the currency lower as a trade conflict with the U.S. escalates.
On paper, even those big market moves pale in comparison with 2015. Three years ago the Shanghai Composite Index lost nearly half its value in the two months starting in June, bottoming out only in early 2016: They have never since regained their mid-2015 highs. The central bank also shocked markets with an abrupt 2% devaluation of the yuan in August that year.
More concerning this time round is that several factors, including Beijing’s campaign against high debt levels and its trade war with the U.S., suggest that investors are responding rationally to signs of fundamental problems for China’s economy.
The U.S. placed tariffs on $34 billion worth of Chinese goods at midnight Eastern time on Friday. And while Shanghai stocks rose .5% on Friday, their fall this year has accelerated since trade tensions ramped up in the spring.
Related Coverage
By contrast, in 2015 the market boom and bust was driven by retail investors who—initially with government encouragement—had taken on piles of debt to bet on stocks, then rushed to sell when the market cooled.
“The 2015 market crash was like unexpectedly catching a fever that came fast but also went fast. What we are witnessing this time is a likely protracted decline,” said Landing Zhang, chief executive of Shanghai asset-management firm CYAMLAN Investment.
One big difference between this year and 2015 is that institutional investors, who typically take a longer-term view of markets, appear to be driving the equity-market selloff.
No breakdown of market trading by investor class is available, but a couple of factors indicate professionals are in the lead. First, much of this year’s Shanghai market slump is due to falling share prices of major state-owned Chinese companies such as Citic Securities and Baoshan Iron & Steel. Such blue-chip stocks are normally favored by big institutional investors.
“The latest selloff was definitely led by institutions, because in the past when the market fell, blue chips often bucked the trend. This time around, blue chips are falling, too, and it has been like a stampede,” said Amy Lin, a senior analyst at brokerage Capital Securities.
A sharp fall in the use of margin finance, which enables investors to bet on stocks with borrowed money, is a sign that China’s 90 million retail investors have had relatively less influence over this year’s market slump. The value of margin loans outstanding is down to 908.9 billion yuan ($137 billion) as of Thursday, less than half the record 2.1 trillion yuan right before the 2015 summer rout.
“Nobody, including myself and many of my friends, wants to invest in anything. There’s no confidence, and we are in no mood,” said Wu Yunfeng, a retail investor from Shanghai who said he hasn’t invested in stocks since last year.
Institutional investors’ increasingly pessimistic view of China’s outlook has started being borne out by economic data. Despite solid growth in the first quarter, figures for May showed a slowdown in areas including investment and retail sales. Beijing’s campaign against shadow-banking activity more than halved China’s overall credit supply in May.
“The economy was in better shape in 2015, and the stock market had rallied for a long time before the crash. There was also no trade war at that time,” Ms. Lin said.
For some, the market gloom is an overdue reflection of the difficult task policy makers in Beijing face in trying to juggle a financial-system housecleaning while protecting economic growth—all against the backdrop of a trade war.
China’s central bank has faced a dilemma when it comes to managing the yuan’s level against the dollar, too. Rising U.S. interest rates and slowing Chinese growth have created market pressure for the yuan to fall. Beijing may be happy to see the yuan slide, in part to offset any impact on its exports as trade tensions rise.
Still, policy makers are eager not to let the yuan drop too far, too fast, in case that encourages heavy capital outflows that could cause a liquidity shortage in China’s financial system.
“It does make sense to witness a shift in sentiment because we were always surprised by how sanguine Beijing has looked with its deleveraging campaign. We didn’t think it was priced in by the market,” said Julian Evans-Pritchard, Singapore-based economist at research firm Capital Economics.
Investor uncertainty over whether Beijing can pull off a deleveraging of China’s economy and avoid a significant slowdown has deepened amid some mixed signs from policy makers. While authorities have tried to cut back on credit by shadow-banking institutions, they have also freed up more funds for bank lending three times this year.
“The government wants to guide more money into the real economy, but it hasn’t been easy because investors aren’t showing lots of confidence in Chinese companies, especially those in the manufacturing sector,” said CYAMLAN Investment’s Mr. Zhang.
Write to Shen Hong at hong.shen@wsj.com"
econ_change of article is: none
###
article: "The Trump administration on Monday moved to reimpose the first round of Iranian trade sanctions that had been suspended under a 2015 nuclear agreement, distancing itself from every other country that signed the deal and marking another decisive moment in the accord’s unraveling.
The renewed sanctions starkly highlighted the divisions between the United States and its allies. The Europeans that were parties to the agreement said they would protect their own companies from legal reprisals and work to maintain Iran’s access to the financial system and its continued export of oil and gas that forms a large share of its income.
“The JCPOA is working and delivering on its goal, namely to ensure that the Iranian programme remains exclusively peaceful,” said a statement from the European Union, Britain, France and Germany, using an acronym for the agreement officially known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
Monday’s announcement seemed to foreclose the likelihood that President Trump and Iranian President Hassan Rouhani would meet anytime soon, although both leaders said they are open to talks. Trump said Iran must significantly change its policies and behavior for sanctions to be lifted, and Rouhani said the United States should be prepared to discuss compensation for decades of intervention in Iran.
“We urge all nations to take such steps to make clear that the Iranian regime faces a choice,” said Trump in a statement. “Either change its threatening, destabilizing behavior and reintegrate with the global economy, or continue down a path of economic isolation.”
Rouhani slammed U.S. sanctions as ineffective, and boasted of Iran’s ties to the European Union, Russia and China, saying Beijing is Tehran’s “closest financial ally.”
The sanctions that take effect Tuesday, 90 days after Trump withdrew the United States from the landmark 2015 nuclear deal, prohibit Iran from using U.S. dollars, the primary currency for international financial transactions and oil purchases. Trade in metals and sales of Iranian-made cars are banned, and permits allowing the import of Iranian carpets and food, such as pistachios, are revoked. So are licenses that have allowed Tehran to buy U.S. and European aircraft and parts — a restriction that comes just days after Iran acquired five new commercial planes from Europe.
The resumption of sanctions leaves the nuclear agreement, once heralded as a historic breakthrough, on its final legs. Sanctions on petroleum will be restored Nov. 5. U.S. officials have advised other governments to begin winding down their purchases of Iranian oil, eventually to zero, to starve Tehran of its chief source of foreign income.
Those who don’t comply could be subject to “severe consequences,” Trump said.
[Trump administration’s use of sanctions draws concern]
The sanctions are the latest action Trump has taken to reverse programs that formed the backbone of President Barack Obama’s legacy, including the Paris climate agreement and a trade pact with Pacific Rim nations. Trump’s antipathy toward the Iran deal has been a theme since the 2016 campaign, when he derided it as the worst in history and insisted that he could secure better terms that also would address Iran’s support of militant groups, its ballistic missile tests and human rights abuses.
A number of prominent hawks on Iran are in the administration’s upper reaches, including Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and national security adviser John Bolton. They rarely mention Iran without calling it the world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism. Pompeo disparages the Iranians as the region’s leading “bad actors” who are guilty of all sorts of “malign activities,” including support for militants in Lebanon, Syria and Yemen.
In a background call to reporters, senior administration officials said Monday that their goal is twofold: to renegotiate the nuclear agreement and to change the government’s behavior. They openly sided with Iranian protesters who are unhappy with the faltering economy and social issues, but stopped short of calling on Iranians to rise up against their government, which they say has spent heavily on militias around the region instead of lifting up the fortunes of its citizens.
“None of this needs to happen,” one official said, adding, “The Iranian people should not suffer because of their regime’s hegemonic regional ambitions.”
In his statement, Trump slammed the Obama administration’s agreement, saying: “The JCPOA, a horrible, one-sided deal, failed to achieve the fundamental objective of blocking all paths to an Iranian nuclear bomb, and it threw a lifeline of cash to a murderous dictatorship that has continued to spread bloodshed, violence, and chaos.”
Trump said he remains “open to reaching a more comprehensive deal that addresses the full range of the regime’s malign activities, including its ballistic missile program and its support for terrorism.” And he hinted at his desire for the theocratic rulers of Iran to be replaced.
“The United States continues to stand with the long-suffering Iranian people, who are the rightful heirs to Iran’s rich heritage and the real victims of the regime’s policies,” he said. “We look forward to the day when the people of Iran, and all people across the region, can prosper together in safety and peace.”
In an interview on Fox News Channel, Bolton said Trump is serious in offering to meet with Iranian officials to talk about Tehran’s nuclear program and regional activities.
“If the ayatollahs want to get out from under the squeeze, they should come and sit down,” Bolton said.
But Rouhani seemed to dismiss the idea, suggesting that sanctions must be lifted before Iran would return to the negotiating table.
“When someone stabs you and then says, ‘Let’s talk,’ he is the one who should take out the knife in the first place,” he said in a televised speech.
One of the first reactions from Tehran came from Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif, who zeroed in on sanctions affecting the sale of commercial aircraft. Administration officials said Iran uses civilian planes to carry equipment and supplies to militias throughout the region.
“Trump Administration wants the world to believe it’s concerned about the Iranian people,” Zarif tweeted. “Yet the very first sanctions it reimposed have canceled licenses for sales of 200+ passenger jets under absurd pretexts, endangering ordinary Iranians. US hypocrisy knows no bounds.”
[How killing the nuclear deal could make it easier for Iran to pursue the bomb in secret]
Reaction in Congress was divided along party lines.
Democrats warned of the dangers of reimposing sanctions. “It risks reopening a resolved conflict, and will divide us further from our European allies,” said Sen. Richard J. Durbin (Ill.), who helped shepherd the deal through Congress.
Republicans welcomed the move as a brake on Iranian aggression. “Make Iran Great Again,” tweeted Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (S.C.). “Dump the Ayatollah!”
The International Atomic Energy Agency, which is charged with monitoring Iran’s nuclear program, has said in 11 consecutive reports that Tehran remains in compliance with the commitments it made.
The White House hopes the renewed sanctions will provide leverage over Tehran as it grapples with a collapsing economy. The Iranian rial has been in a free fall as the deadline for the first round of sanctions approached.
Iran’s Central Bank said it would ease foreign exchange rules to prop up its currency and allow access to hard currency at market rates. The rial has lost about half its value since the spring.
The administration officials said Iran’s economy has lagged in large part because of widespread corruption and domination by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps. One official noted that almost 100 foreign companies have announced their intention to leave the Iranian market.
“Foreign investors in Iran never know whether they are facilitating commerce or terrorism,” the official told reporters.
The sanctions will squeeze the Iranian economy even more, and Tehran has started talking about the need to return to a war footing with a “resistance” economy. The White House insists that it will ensure that sanctions are enforced.
“We are very intent on using these financial sanctions to great economic leverage,” another administration official said, characterizing the economy as on a downward spiral even before the sanctions decision was made. “There’s no question financial sanctions are going to continue to bring significant financial pressure against the world’s largest state sponsor of terror.”
Anne Gearan and Felicia Sonmez in Washington and Erin Cunningham in Istanbul contributed to this report."
econ_change of article is: irrelevant
###
article: "WASHINGTON — President Trump announced on Monday that he was imposing new sanctions on Iran, stepping up a policy of pressuring the nation’s leaders and further squeezing the Iranian economy in retaliation for what the United States says are recent aggressive acts by Tehran.
The move came on top of actions taken by the administration this spring to cut off all revenues from Iranian oil exports, the lifeblood of the nation’s economy.
The new sanctions are aimed at preventing some top Iranian officials from using the international banking system or any financial vehicles set up by European nations or other countries. But the Iranian officials most likely do not keep substantial assets in international banks, if any at all, or use those institutions for transactions, and any additional pressure from the new sanctions is likely to be minimal.
The largely symbolic nature of this round of sanctions indicates that the Trump administration is running low on arrows in its economic quiver. It now finds itself in a waiting game, as it watches for whether the latest clampdown on oil exports, which was announced in late April, will force the Iranian leaders to surrender to American demands in exchange for economic relief.
Speaking in the Oval Office, Mr. Trump said the new sanctions order would bar Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the supreme leader of Iran, and his office from access to the international financial system. The Treasury Department said it was also imposing sanctions on eight Iranian military commanders, including the head of a unit that the Americans say was responsible for shooting down an American drone last Thursday.
Mr. Trump acted at a time of rising concerns over Iran. Those have been prompted in part by declarations from Tehran that it is amassing more nuclear fuel, the latest evidence that Mr. Trump’s withdrawal last year from a nuclear containment deal is pushing Iranian leaders to violate terms they had been abiding by until now.
“We will continue to increase pressure on Tehran,” Mr. Trump said as he sat at his desk in the Oval Office preparing to sign an executive order. “Never can Iran have a nuclear weapon.”
While he warned on Monday that his restraint has limits, Mr. Trump has signaled that he prefers tightening sanctions to launching an immediate military strike to try to alter Iran’s behavior and force political change in Tehran.
But critics said the new sanctions would have little substantive effect and could further inflame tensions.
“Symbolic politics at its worst,” said Robert Malley, the president and chief executive of the International Crisis Group and a former senior Obama administration official on the Middle East. “At every level it is illogical, counterproductive or useless.”
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said the administration would add Mohammad Javad Zarif, Iran’s foreign minister and its top negotiator on the nuclear deal, to the sanctions list this week. (In his announcement about the sanctions on the supreme leader, Mr. Trump misspoke and said “Ayatollah Khomeini,” who died in 1989, rather than “Khamenei.”)
The inflation rate in Iran has risen to about 50 percent and many Iranians are dissatisfied with the economy, but authoritarian leaders have historically shown they can withstand stress from sanctions for many years. Some Iranian citizens also blame the United States government for the devastation of their economy, and they point to the shortage of critical medicine, even though Trump administration officials say they do not intend to limit humanitarian aid.
Iranian officials could choose to carry out nonfatal attacks on United States or international interests, as they did with the downing of the drone, to try to get the Trump administration to ease sanctions. Iran’s naval commander, Rear Adm. Hossein Khanzadi, said on Monday that the military was capable of shooting down other drones that violate Iranian airspace.
Mr. Trump said on Monday that he was willing to negotiate with Iran — “I think Iran, potentially, has a phenomenal future” — but insisted Iranian leaders would have to end their pursuit of nuclear weapons, as well as halt uranium enrichment, “fueling of foreign conflicts” and “belligerent acts directed against the United States and its allies.”
Mr. Trump always emphasizes the need to prevent Iran from getting a nuclear weapon, while his hawkish top foreign policy aides, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and John R. Bolton, the national security adviser, say Iran must also make wholesale changes to its policies in the Middle East.
International nuclear experts say Iran does not have an active nuclear weapons program and has been adhering to the terms of a landmark nuclear agreement that it reached in 2015 with world powers.
Mr. Trump withdrew from the deal in May 2018 and reimposed harsh sanctions. Iran said last week it would soon breach some limits on low-grade uranium in the deal, a type of fissile material used in civilian reactors. Iran would still be far from being able to make a nuclear weapon; its announcement appeared intended to pressure European nations to find ways to resume trade with Iran in order to alleviate the impact of American sanctions.
Mr. Trump’s rollout of sanctions and the effort to end all oil exports, along with an insistence by Mr. Pompeo that Tehran meet 12 expansive demands mostly unrelated to the nuclear program, “set a spark to the escalatory cycle we’re seeing today,” said Dalia Dassa Kaye, a Middle East expert at RAND Corporation, a research group in California.
“The administration argued maximum pressure would bring Iran to the negotiating table, but instead it brought provocative Iranian actions that are not likely to end without Iran getting something concrete on sanctions relief,” she said. “Talk about wanting to talk is not likely to be enough.”
China and Russia, who also signed the nuclear deal, have joined European nations in opposing the sanctions. European officials are trying to persuade Iran to stay in the agreement and are expected to speak with Mr. Trump about his Iran policy at the Group of 20 summit meeting this week in Japan.
Mr. Trump and his top foreign policy aides say further squeezing Iran will compel its leaders to buckle to demands to limit their nuclear program in ways that go beyond the terms of the 2015 deal, which was negotiated by the Obama administration and opposed by many Republicans, Israel and Arab nations in the Persian Gulf.
Hesameddin Ashena, an adviser to President Hassan Rouhani of Iran, said on Twitter that the “U.S.’s claim that it wants negotiations without preconditions while it increases sanctions and pressure is not acceptable.”
If the United States wants more than the 2015 nuclear deal, he said, “it must offer us more than the deal with international guarantees.”
On Monday afternoon, the Iranian ambassador to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi, told reporters that he had been barred from a closed-door meeting of the Security Council called by the United States. He also said there was no way Iran and the United States could have a dialogue right now.
The imposition of more sanctions could provoke further actions by Iran to add to the crisis that has unfolded since early May in the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman, analysts say.
American officials have blamed Iran for two separate sets of explosions on six oil tankers around the Strait of Hormuz, saying Iran is trying to increase global oil prices in retaliation for the administration’s “maximum pressure” campaign. Iranian officials have denied responsibility.
The downing of the drone prompted Mr. Trump to order a missile strike on Iranian military sites last Thursday, but he pulled back at the last minute after hours of debate, and instead opted for a cyberattack.
On Monday, Mr. Pompeo met at a palace in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, with King Salman, then had lunch with Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, whom the administration has supported despite his suspected role in the murder of Jamal Khashoggi, a Washington Post journalist, and in overseeing an air war that has killed thousands of civilians in Yemen. The State Department said Mr. Pompeo talked with the king and the prince about “heightened tensions in the region and the need for stronger maritime security to promote freedom of navigation in the Strait of Hormuz.”
Mr. Pompeo then flew to Abu Dhabi to meet with Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed over dinner. Mr. Pompeo told the prince that his nation should contribute money and military resources to a maritime security program for ships around the Strait of Hormuz. The Americans are calling it the Sentinel program, and Mr. Pompeo said it was supposed to involve 20 nations in addition to Saudi Arabia and the U.A.E.
“The president is keen that the United States doesn’t bear the cost of this,” Mr. Pompeo told the prince."
econ_change of article is: irrelevant
###
article: "Advertisement
Supported by
What’s the Yield Curve? ‘A Powerful Signal of Recessions’ Has Wall Street’s Attention
You can try to play down a trade war with China. You can brush off the impact of rising oil prices on corporate earnings.
But if you’re in the business of making economic predictions, it has become very difficult to disregard an important signal from the bond market.
The so-called yield curve is perilously close to predicting a recession — something it has done before with surprising accuracy — and it’s become a big topic on Wall Street.
Terms like “yield curve” can be mind-numbing if you’re not a bond trader, but the mechanics, practical impact and psychology of it are fairly straightforward. Here’s what the fuss is all about.
First, the mechanics.
The yield curve is basically the difference between interest rates on short-term United States government bonds, say, two-year Treasury notes, and long-term government bonds, like 10-year Treasury notes.
Typically, when an economy seems in good health, the rate on the longer-term bonds will be higher than short-term ones. The extra interest is to compensate, in part, for the risk that strong economic growth could set off a broad rise in prices, known as inflation. Lately, though, long-term bond yields have been stubbornly slow to rise — which suggests traders are concerned about long-term growth — even as the economy shows plenty of vitality.
At the same time, the Federal Reserve has been raising short-term rates, so the yield curve has been “flattening.” In other words, the gap between short-term interest rates and long-term rates is shrinking.
On Thursday, the gap between two-year and 10-year United States Treasury notes was roughly 0.34 percentage points. It was last at these levels in 2007 when the United States economy was heading into what was arguably the worst recession in almost 80 years.
As scary as references to the financial crisis makes things sound, flattening alone does not mean that the United States is doomed to slip into another recession. But if it keeps moving in this direction, eventually long-term interest rates will fall below short-term rates.
When that happens, the yield curve has “inverted.” An inversion is seen as “a powerful signal of recessions,” as the president of the New York Fed,John Williams, said this year, and that’s what everyone is watching for.
Every recession of the past 60 years has been preceded by an inverted yield curve, according to research from the San Francisco Fed. Curve inversions have “correctly signaled all nine recessions since 1955 and had only one false positive, in the mid-1960s, when an inversion was followed by an economic slowdown but not an official recession,” the bank’s researchers wrote in March.
Even if it hasn’t happened yet, the move in that direction has Wall Street’s attention.
“For economists, of course it’s always been traditionally a very good signal of directionality of the economy,” said Sonja Gibbs, senior director of capital markets at the Institute of International Finance. “That’s why everyone is bemoaning the flattening of the yield curve.”
Recession? Really?
Sure, it seems like a strange time to be worried about recession. Unemployment is at an 18-year low, corporate investment is picking up steam, and consumer spending shows signs of rebounding.
Some economists on Wall Street think the economy could be growing at around a nearly 5 percent annualized clip this quarter. But if the current economic vigor is only reflecting a short-term stimulus coming from the Trump administration’s tax cut, then some kind of slowdown is to be expected.
“It’s very hard to see what’s going to goose the economy further from these levels,” Ms. Gibbs said.
And the financial markets can sometimes sniff out problems with the economy before they show up in the official economic snapshots published on G.D.P. and unemployment. Another notable yield curve inversion occurred in February 2000, just before the stock market’s dot-com bubble burst.
In that sense, the government bond market isn’t alone. Stocks have been in a sideways struggle since the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index last peaked on Jan. 26. Returns on corporate bonds are negative, as are some key commodities tied to industrial activity.
An important caveat to the predictive power of the yield curve is that it can’t predict precisely when a recession will begin. In the past the recession has come in as little as six months, or as long as two years, after the inversion, the San Francisco Fed’s researchers note.
In other words, there’s a reason to look at the yield curve skeptically, despite its prowess at predicting recessions.
The new fear gauge.
As in all market moves, perceptions of its significance mean the yield curve can sometimes become a feedback loop.
If enough investors begin to grow concerned about a recession, they will most likely put more and more money into the safety of long-term government bonds. That buying binge would likely help flatten, or invert, the yield curve.
Then people will write articles about the curve’s sending a stronger signal on recession. And that could, in turn, drive even more people to buy into long-term bonds. Rinse. Repeat.
There’s also a practical impact.
But it’s not just psychology. The yield curve helps determine some of the decisions that are the most crucial to the health of the American economy.
Specifically, the flattening yield curve makes banking, which is basically the business of borrowing money at short-term rates and lending it at long-term rates, less profitable. And if the yield curve inverts, it means lending money becomes a losing proposition.
Either way, the flow of lending is likely to be curtailed. And in the United States, where borrowed money is the lifeblood of economic activity, that can slam the brakes on economic growth.
The Fed’s hand.
There is an argument to be made against reading too much into the yield curve’s moves — and it hangs on the idea that, rather than the free market, central banks have had a big influence on both the long-term and short-term rates.
Since the last recession, central banks bought trillions of dollars of government bonds as they tried to push long-term interest rates lower in order to lend a helping hand to the economy.
Even though they’re reversing course now, central banks still own massive amounts of those bonds, and that may be keeping long-term interest rates lower than they would otherwise be.
Also, the Federal Reserve has been raising short-term interest rates since December 2015 and has indicated it will keep doing so this year.
So if long-term rates were pushed lower by central bank bond buying, and now short-term rates are being pushed higher as the Fed tightens its monetary policy, the yield curve has nowhere to go but flatter.
“In the current environment, I think it’s a less reliable indicator than it has been in the past,” said Matthew Luzzetti, a senior economist at Deutsche Bank.
Advertisement"
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "U.S. Government Bond Yields Fall After Fed Decision
Fed’s chairman did little to alter the impression that it was prepared to cut interest rates for the first time in more than a decade
Ten-year Treasury yields fell below 2% for the first time since late 2016 after the Federal Reserve stood pat on its benchmark rate but opened the door to a near-term-cut, the latest milestone in this year’s global government bond rally that has sent yields in Europe to a series of record lows.
The benchmark yield was recently at 1.981% in early Asian trading Thursday versus 2.023% late in the New York day.
U.S. government bond prices surged higher Wednesday afternoon following the Fed’s signal on rates. The 10-year yield was as high as 3.232% on Nov. 8.
For most of this year, global bond yields have been falling and prices have been rising due to concerns about global economic growth. Yields have hit record lows in a number of European markets.
As confidence in global growth ebbs and inflation expectations decline world-wide, demand for corporate and high-quality sovereign debt will continue to drive yields lower, said Rick Rieder, BlackRock Inc.’s chief investment officer for global fixed income.
“People say yields can only go so far—I think European interest rates are going to go lower,” he added, predicting the 10-year yield likely won’t stop at 2%.
Treasury yields slid immediately after the Fed released its policy statement and continued declining as Fed Chairman Jerome Powell spoke at a news conference.
Mr. Powell did little to alter the impression that the Fed was prepared to cut interest rates for the first time in more than a decade. Many investors had anticipated those signals, but they still hadn’t fully been reflected in bond prices.
Interest-rate forecasts released on Wednesday showed eight of 17 officials project the Fed will cut the benchmark federal-funds rate this year, with seven of those officials seeing two quarter-point reductions.
Fed officials in their policy statement made note of both increased uncertainty about the economic outlook and muted inflation pressures, while saying they would “act as appropriate to sustain the expansion.”
Such language helped push the yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note to 2.023%, its lowest close since Nov. 8, 2016—the day of the last presidential election—from 2.060% on Tuesday.
Yields on shorter-term bonds, which are particularly sensitive to changes in monetary policy, logged bigger declines, with the two-year yield dropping nearly 0.11 percentage point to 1.758%, its lowest close since November 2017.
“Half the committee is ready to pull the trigger on a rate cut at some point this year,” said Thomas Simons, senior vice president and money-market economist in the fixed-income group at Jefferies LLC. “Powell’s tone in his press conference to me suggested the threshold for a rate cut is not particularly far away.”
Already this year, investors had been scooping up Treasurys largely in response to slowing global growth, soft inflation data and trade tensions, which have clouded the economic outlook.
Previewing Mr. Powell’s comments, European Central Bank President Mario Draghi had signaled Tuesday that the ECB could start rolling out new stimulus measures, including a reduction to already negative interest rates.
Despite the momentum toward a rate cut, some analysts cautioned that the Fed might keep rates steady if the U.S. and China make progress on trade talks on the sidelines of next week’s Group of 20 summit in Japan.
Such a scenario in turn could push Treasury yields higher.
The WSJ Dollar Index, which measures the U.S. currency against a basket of 16 others, fell 0.4% to 90.40.
Related
- Stocks Rise as Fed Leaves Rates Unchanged
- Fed Holds Rates Steady, Hints at Possible Cuts if Outlook Dims
- Heard on the Street: Do Investors Really Want This Fed Rate Cut?
- Fed’s Bullard Voted Against Rate Decision
- Parsing the Fed: How the June Statement Changed From May
- Transcript: Fed Chairman Powell’s Postmeeting Press Conference
—Daniel Kruger contributed to this article.
Write to Sam Goldfarb at sam.goldfarb@wsj.com
Appeared in the June 20, 2019, print edition as 'U.S. Bond Yield Falls Below 2% In Asia.'
Most Popular Videos
Most Popular Articles
-
Boeing’s Latest 737 MAX Concern: Pilots’ Physical Strength
-
Opinion: Accusing the New York Times of ‘Treason,’ Trump Crosses a Line
-
The Future of Housing Rises in Phoenix
-
Afraid of Missing the Next School Shooter, One Prosecutor Charged 216 Kids. Now He’s Rethinking.
-
How 7.4 Tons of Venezuela’s Gold Landed in Africa—and Vanished"
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "The financial world has been atwitter about the inversion of the yield curve. It is a phenomenon in the bond market in which longer-term interest rates fall below shorter-term interest rates, and has historically been a warning sign that a recession could be on the way.
This all seems obvious to people who are steeped in bond market math and the workings of fixed-income markets, and can be completely perplexing to those who are not.
Maybe a sports gambling analogy will make the intuition clearer.
Any adult can walk into a casino and bet on how an N.F.L. team will do this year. For example, bettors once again expect the New England Patriots to be an excellent team — that they are likely to win 11 or 12 out of their 16 games. Casinos will let you wager on how many games they will win this season.
But what if casinos not only would let you bet on how a team will do this year, but how they will perform over the next, 2, 5, 10 or even 30 years? What would you pay for a betting slip that promises, say, a $10 payout for every Patriots regular season win in the next decade?
And what if you could then sell that slip to other gamblers, with its price rising and falling as bettors’ views on the outlook for the Patriots changes? Essentially, you could take the price that people are paying for those slips with different durations, and, with some simple math, figure out how many games bettors expect the team to win each year in the future.
That’s kind of what the bond market does with interest rates. Bonds that mature at different times are always trading on global markets, and with some fairly simple math you can figure out what the price of different bonds implies about how interest rates are expected to change over the coming years.
Interest rates are closely connected to the rate of economic growth and inflation. In boom times, lots of people want to borrow money, to expand their businesses, say, or buy houses. And the Federal Reserve will raise the interest rate that it controls in order to prevent the economy from overheating, resulting in inflation. When a slowdown comes, the process works in reverse.
If you buy, say, a 90-day Treasury bill, you are likely to receive an interest rate that is closely tied to whatever the Federal Reserve has currently set as its main target for interest rates in the banking system and any changes the Fed might make in the near future.
It’s like betting on next week’s game: We know a lot about what opponent your team is facing, how well they’ve been playing, whether there are injuries that are likely to affect the outcome.
But if you buy a 10-year Treasury note, you’re making a bet on the more distant future. The economy will probably change a lot over the next decade. You can’t predict exactly what will happen, but you are betting on the general direction of things: Do you expect the economy to heat up, creating inflation pressures and causing the Fed to raise rates? Or do you expect it cool down?
So purchase of a longer-term Treasury bond is like making one of those long-term bets with a casino on how a team will perform for many years to come. You have no idea what the details are of which players they will sign or who will be coaching the team. You are betting on the general direction.
How might that bet look with two different teams?
The Arizona Cardinals were terrible last year, and most bettors expect them to be pretty bad this year as well: Vegas odds suggest they will only win five or six games. But they have drafted an exciting young quarterback (Kyler Murray) and hired a new coach.
Even if you’re not a believer in the Cardinals for this season, you could reasonably expect that they will get better in the coming years — that their future is better than their present. If most bettors believed that, you could tell that from the difference between the price of a 10-year Cardinals betting contract and a one-year Cardinals betting contract — it might reveal, for example, that the team is expected to go from winning 5 games this year to 9 games two or three years from now.
Or consider the Patriots. They have been the best team in the game for the past two decades, but their quarterback, Tom Brady, is 42 years old, and their coach, Bill Belichick, is 67. It would be reasonable to expect the team to decline over the next decade after these stars retire.
The prices of the Patriots one-year contract, in other words, would probably reflect greater optimism than their 10-year contract.
Essentially, the relative prices of those short-term versus long-term betting contracts would tell you whether a team is viewed as likely to be on the upswing or the downswing — not necessarily today but at some point in the next few years.
That’s exactly what the yield curve is doing: It is telling us the difference between shorter-term and longer-term interest rates, and hence whether investors expect the economy to get better or worse in the years ahead. Our fictional Patriots yield curve is inverted, and so is the actual United States Treasury bond yield curve.
[Here’s more about the yield curve and the 3-D rendering that appears with this article.]
The moves in the bond market over the last nine months and especially the last couple of weeks are the equivalent of what would happen if Mr. Brady and Mr. Belichick both announced that this would be their last season before retiring. The current outlook remains stable, but the outlook for the coming decade has gotten worse.
Longer-term rates below shorter term rates are a clear signal from bond investors that they think the United States economy is on the downswing — that its future looks worse than its present.
It’s the opposite of times like 2009, when the economy was in recession and the yield curve pointed to future improvement. At those moments, the United States more resembled the Cardinals, a bad team but with room to improve in the coming years and (potentially) the tools to do it.
The good news is that this is merely the best guess of investors with trillions of dollars on the line. It could be wrong. Maybe the Patriots will pluck another Brady-esque quarterback in the draft, Mr. Belichick will coach until he is 80, and the team will remain a perennial Super Bowl contender. Market prices can be wrong!
And similarly, maybe the negative signals about the global economy will turn out to be overdone, and the United States economy will continue improving despite what the yield curve is suggesting now.
A lot of surprising things can happen in one N.F.L. season, let alone across years of them. That’s even more true for the global economy."
econ_change of article is: none
###
article: "Stock markets tanked Wednesday after the bond market sounded a loud warning that the U.S. economy might be headed toward a recession.
Investors are spooked by a scenario known as the “inverted yield curve,” which occurs when the interest rates on short-term bonds are higher than the interest rates paid by long-term bonds. What it means is that people are so worried about the near-term future that they are piling into safer long-term investments.
In a healthy economy, bondholders typically demand to be paid more — or receive a higher “yield” — on longer-term bonds than they do for short-term bonds. That’s because longer term bonds require people to lock their money up for a greater period of time — and investors want to be compensated for that risk. In contrast, bonds that require investors to make shorter time commitments, say for three months, don’t require as much sacrifice and usually pay less.
Just think about the deposits in your bank account, which are in many ways a loan to the bank. You can withdraw that money at any time, so the bank doesn’t pay you a high interest rate. By comparison, if you lock up your money in the bank for a year or longer, you’ll get higher rates. The bond market works similarly: The longer you lend your money, the higher return you’ll get.
For U.S. government securities — known as Treasury bonds — that relationship has now turned upside down. On Wednesday morning, the yield on the 10-year Treasury temporarily fell below the yield on the two-year Treasury for the first time since 2007. (It later recovered slightly.)
The following chart shows the difference in yield between the two-year Treasury bond and Treasury bonds of other duration. Bonds of longer duration should have higher yield, but as you can see, it has dipped below for several longer-term bonds.
Other parts of the yield curve have been inverted for a few months. For instance, three-month Treasurys have been yielding more than 10-year Treasurys since late May. The gap became more dramatic Wednesday, with three-month Treasurys paying nearly 0.4 percentage points more than 10-year Treasurys as of midafternoon, greater than the 0.1 percent difference seen in late May.
The more pronounced inversion is a sign that people are more concerned about the fallout of the trade war between the U.S. and China and worried by signs that economic growth may be slowing around the globe.
[Stocks losses deepen as a key recession warning surfaces]
So why do investors care?
The yield curve has inverted before every U.S. recession since 1955, although it sometimes happens months or years before the recession starts. Because of that link, substantial and long-lasting inversions of the yield curve are largely viewed as a strong predictor that a downturn is on the way.
Two researchers for the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco summed it up in a letter they published last year. “Forecasting future economic developments is a tricky business, but the [yield curve] has a strikingly accurate record for forecasting recessions,” they wrote. “Periods with an inverted yield curve are reliably followed by economic slowdowns and almost always by a recession.”
The fact that people are willing to take such little money for their long-term bonds suggests that they aren’t too worried about inflation, says Brian Rehling, co-head of global fixed income strategy for the Wells Fargo Investment Institute. If they aren’t too worried about inflation, it also suggests that they expect the economy to grow more slowly in the future, he says. Inflation usually picks up when the economy is hot.
“Essentially, investors are saying, ‘We’re worried about economic weakness,’ ” Rehling said.
[Banks are paying people to borrow money. That’s alarming news for the global economy.]
The yield curve inversion also suggests that investors expect the Federal Reserve to keep cutting short-term interest rates in an effort to boost the economy, Rehling says.
Fed officials cut the benchmark interest rate by 0.25 percentage points last month, the first rate cut since December 2008. Investors are now expecting the Fed to cut rates by another 0.25 percentage points during its next meeting in September.
There are reasons to have hope the economy won’t go into a recession. The labor market is strong, and most people who want a job are able to get one. Consumers are still opening up their wallets, which is lifting economic growth.
Even if the shift in the yield curve is followed by a recession, the slowdown might not happen right away. A look back at previous downturns shows that yields have typically inverted an average of 18 months before the start of the recession.
Andrew Van Dam contributed to this report."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "Advertisement
Supported by
What the Bond Market Is Telling Us About the Biden Economy
A recent rise in interest rates hints that a recovery is on the way, but it could also mean harder choices ahead on spending.
While Washington debates the size of a new economic rescue plan, the bond market is sending a message: A meaningful acceleration in both growth and inflation in the years ahead looks more likely now than it did just a few weeks ago.
That would be mostly good news, suggesting an economy recovering quickly from the pandemic. Interest rates remain very low by historical standards, even for the longest-term securities. Bond prices imply that inflation will be consistent with the Federal Reserve’s target of 2 percent annual rises in consumer prices, not a more worrisome spiral.
But the surge in rates has brought an end to a period of several months when borrowing was essentially free, seemingly far into the future. For the Biden administration and the Federal Reserve, that implies that the free-lunch stage of the crisis is ending, and there could be harder questions ahead.
In particular, it means that the downside of bad policy — federal spending that doesn’t generate much economic activity, for example — is higher than it was as recently as December.
“We’re at a place where the markets are starting to grapple with the question of whether there are trade-offs between more stimulus today and potentially higher rates and more inflation down the road,” said Nathan Sheets, chief economist of PGIM Fixed Income and a former official at the Treasury and the Fed.
The yield on 10-year Treasury bonds — the rate the United States government must pay to borrow money for a decade — was 1.37 percent Monday, low by historical standards but well above its recent low of 0.51 percent in August and 0.92 percent at the end of December. Those higher Treasury rates generally translate into higher mortgage rates and corporate borrowing costs, so the surge could take some of the air out of bubbly housing and financial markets.
The inflation-adjusted interest rate the United States Treasury must pay to borrow money for 30 years was negative for much of the last year, meaning the government would pay investors back less in inflation-adjusted terms than it borrowed. Last week, the rate rose into positive territory for the first time since June and closed at 0.06 percent Monday. (For shorter time horizons, the “real yield” remains in negative territory.)
That’s particularly striking given that Fed officials have repeatedly said they expect the short-term interest rate target they control to be near zero for quite some time — and bond investors appear to believe them. The yield on two-year Treasuries has barely budged in the same span.
What is happening is known as a “steepening of the yield curve,” with long-term rates rising as short-term rates hold still. It tends to presage faster economic growth; it is the opposite of a “yield curve inversion,” which is known as a harbinger of recessions.
But the flip side is that the moment appears to have passed when bond markets were giving the government an all-clear signal to do whatever was necessary to boost the economy, essentially making endless funding available at extraordinarily low cost. That could have implications for how the Biden administration approaches the rest of its economic agenda.
Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen has emphasized that low interest rates, which keep the cost of debt service low, are important in her thinking about how much the government can comfortably borrow and spend.
At The New York Times’s DealBook conference on Monday, Ms. Yellen, after noting that the government’s ratio of debt to the size of the economy is much larger than it was before the global financial crisis, said: “Look at a different metric, which is more important, which is what is the cost of that debt. Look for example at interest payments on the debt as a share of G.D.P.,” which is below 2007 levels.
“So I think we have more fiscal space than we used to because of the interest rate environment,” Ms. Yellen told the Times’s Andrew Ross Sorkin.
By implication, the further that bond yields rise, and inflation expectations along with them, the more the Biden administration would view their potential spending to be constrained. Congress is now at work on a $1.9 trillion pandemic aid package, which Democratic leaders hope to pass in March. They envision a large-scale infrastructure plan after that.
Jerome Powell, the Federal Reserve chair, will face questions from Congress on Tuesday about the central bank’s policies. In other recent appearances, he has emphasized the importance of returning the economy to full health above all other goals, and stressed that inflation has been persistently too low rather than too high over the last decade.
“Fed Chair Powell has taken each and every opportunity to reassure investors that the Fed would consider near-term inflationary pressure to be transitory,” said Katie Nixon, chief investment officer at Northern Trust Wealth Management. “The market is taking the Fed at its word that short rates will be anchored at zero for a considerable time.”
The gap between the prices of regular and inflation-protected bonds as of Friday’s close imply that the Consumer Price Index is expected to rise 2.29 percent a year over the next five years, and 1.99 percent a year for the five years after that. The Fed aims for 2 percent annual inflation as measured by a different index that tends to be somewhat lower, meaning these so-called “inflation break-evens” are broadly consistent with the central bank’s goals.
Put it all together, and the surge in rates so far is basically an optimistic sign that the post-pandemic economy will mark the end of a long period of sluggish growth. But the speed of the adjustment is a reminder that the line between too hot and just right is a narrow one.
Advertisement"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "The economy got off to an even weaker start this year than first thought, the government reported Friday, as economic activity contracted amid a disappointing trade picture and continued caution on spending by businesses and consumers alike.
The 0.7 percent decline in economic output in the first quarter of 2015 was a reversal of the initial 0.2 percent advance for the period reported last month by the Commerce Department.
While statistical quirks and one-time factors like wintry weather in some parts of the country played a role, as did a work slowdown at West Coast ports, the lackluster report for January, February and March underscores the American economy’s seeming inability to generate much momentum.
Much of the revision was spurred by fresh data showing businesses added to inventories at a slower pace than first estimated, while net exports fell slightly more than first thought. A sharp pullback in energy exploration in the wake of falling oil prices is also putting pressure on business investment.
Most experts had expected Friday’s data to show a contraction in the first quarter, and virtually no mainstream economists believe the country is on the verge of a recession. Still, the weakness is a reason the Federal Reserve is not expected to raise short-term interest rates until the second half of 2015, after speculation that a June increase was possible.
Consumers, who generate roughly two-thirds of growth, have also been less willing to open their wallets, despite the windfall provided by lower gasoline prices. Personal consumption rose by 1.8 percent last quarter, down from 4.4 percent in late 2014.
After the economy grew at an annual rate of nearly 5 percent in the spring and summer of 2014, some experts concluded that the economy had found its footing and predicted that a healthier, sustained growth rate of near 3 percent was finally at hand.
The new data for the first quarter, and signs of only a tepid rebound in the current, second quarter of 2015, are now forcing some economists to rethink earlier assumptions.
“This isn’t the off-to-the-races kind of expansion we envisioned six months ago,” said Scott Anderson, chief economist at Bank of the West in San Francisco. “More and more folks are coming around to the view that the long-term growth rate of the American economy is 2 percent, at best. We can’t sustain 3 or 4 percent growth for very long, so it’s two steps forward, one step back.”
While cloudy, the economic outlook is not necessarily dark.
Unemployment has been falling steadily, and experts think it could fall to about 5 percent by the end of the year, from 5.4 percent now. The jobless rate stood at 8 percent a little over two years ago.
The real estate market has also been robust as of late, with a measure of pending home sales last month hitting a nine-year high, according to data released Thursday by the National Association of Realtors. New-home sales and construction were also strong in April.
Indeed, an upward revision in residential construction last quarter actually offset some of the weakness elsewhere.
And experts say some of the weakness in the first quarter of the year reflects how the numbers are crunched by government statisticians to account for seasonal variations, like the retail slowdown that follows the holiday shopping season or less business activity as temperatures plunge.
That process, known as seasonal adjustment, may indeed have exaggerated the underlying weakness last quarter, according to an analysis by private economists at firms like Barclays and Macroeconomic Advisers, as well as at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. In first quarter of 2014, the winter slowdown was even more pronounced, with the economy contracting at an annual rate of 2.1 percent.
Whatever role seasonal adjustments did play, Mr. Anderson cautions against dismissing the first quarter weakness as a statistical quirk.
“Some economists have been trying to explain away the negative numbers,” he said.. “I don’t think it’s so easily dismissed. We will get a modest bounce back this quarter.”
In particular, he said, the dollar’s surge against foreign currencies like the euro is hurting manufacturers and other exporters, a trend likely to continue even with the resolution of the West Coast port slowdown.
Although he expects the annual rate of growth to rebound to above 2 percent this quarter and to about 3 percent in the second half of 2015, that still leaves his estimate at 2.2 percent for the annual growth rate for the year. Last year, the economy grew at an annual rate of 2.4 percent.
“There’s some truth to the statistical issues and the one-time factors, but we are still left with a real deceleration,” Mr. Anderson said. “Two percent is probably where the economy will gravitate longer term.”"
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "Investment firm warns that recent stock gyrations will have broad, negative repercussions

Updated July 22, 2015 9:14 pm ET

The world’s biggest hedge fund has turned on the world’s fastest-growing economy.

Bridgewater Associates LP, one of Wall Street’s more outspoken bulls on China, told investors this week that the country’s recent stock-market rout will likely have broad, far-reaching repercussions.

The fund’s executives once had been vocal advocates of China’s potential. But that was before panic in the country’s stock markets shaved a third of the value off Shanghai’s main index, battering hordes of mom-and-pop investors and hedge funds alike, before partially rebounding.

“Our views about China have changed,” Bridgewater’s billionaire founder, Raymond Dalio, wrote with colleagues in a note sent to clients earlier this week. “There are now no safe places to invest.”

Bridgewater, which has $169 billion under management, is renowned for its ability to navigate global economic trends—including the profit it turned in 2008, when most of its peers lost big. The company’s flagship fund reported its worst month in nearly a year in June, trimming its gains for 2015 to about 10%, a person familiar with the matter said.

A spokeswoman declined to elaborate on the fund’s changing views on China.

(Update: Bridgewater Issues Statement to ‘Clarify Their Thinking’)

The move adds Mr. Dalio and Bridgewater to a growing chorus of high-profile investors who are challenging the long-held view that China’s rise will provide a ballast to a whole host of investments, from commodities to bonds to shares in multinational firms. For a generation, bets on China’s rising middle class have been commonplace on Wall Street and beyond as investors have looked to diversify their holdings.

But with the country’s stocks on a roller-coaster ride this summer, those beliefs are being tested. The world’s second-largest economy faces renewed questions about the sustainability of its growth and the government’s commitment to loosening its grip on the country’s heavily controlled markets.

Kingdon Capital Management LLC, a nearly $3 billion New York hedge-fund firm, told clients this week it had sold all its shares in Chinese companies listed on the Hong Kong exchange. It said it was spooked by the fallout from a surge in China in the use of borrowed money to purchase stocks, particularly after authorities cracked down on the practice, helping drag down Kingdon’s investments.

The firm said it would wait until the level of such borrowing in the market drops further before going in anew.

The shifts by Kingdon and Bridgewater follow a series of concerns raised publicly last week about China by other high-profile hedge-fund managers, including Elliott Management Corp. founder Paul Singer, Perry Capital LLC founder Richard Perry and Pershing Square Capital Management LP founder William Ackman. In China, few traders dare cross regulators by publicly expressing their concerns.

“It looks worse to me than 2007 in the United States,” Mr. Ackman said during an investment conference in New York, pointing to the unreliability of the government’s economic statistics. “Much worse.”

Mr. Ackman has a long-running bet against nutritional-products maker Herbalife Ltd., partly based on his belief that the firm’s fast-growing Chinese business is illegal and part of a global pyramid scheme.

Herbalife has denied the allegations.

The shifts are also a blow to Chinese leaders who have sought to woo international investors into their tightly controlled market. Even before the selloff, global investors from hedge funds to big mutual-fund firms had been reluctant to invest directly in the country, despite the Chinese government’s efforts to make it easier for foreign investors to buy mainland-listed stocks, known as A-shares. Aggressive measures to stem the rout underscored concerns about China’s unpredictable government and lack of transparency, investors say.

Overseas investors have pulled cash out of Chinese stocks via a trading link between Hong Kong and Shanghai for 12 of the past 13 trading days, according to Hong Kong stock-exchange data.

At its trough on July 8, the Shanghai Composite Index was off 32% from its June highs. Even days after the market began to climb back, about half of the 2,800 stocks listed on the Shanghai and Shenzhen markets remained suspended from trading, though many have since resumed.

The Shanghai Composite edged up 0.2% Wednesday but remains down 22% from its high in June. The smaller Shenzhen market, where nearly a quarter of stocks remain suspended from trading, rose 1% Wednesday.

The stock-market rout adds to a growing list of hurdles China faces. While its economy expanded at a 7% annual rate in the second quarter—a level many economists thought would be hard to reach—many areas, such as building and infrastructure investment, showed weakness even after a succession of recent interest-rate cuts. China’s political leaders are also pushing to reduce the dependence of its slowing economy on export-driven growth and to lessen the heavy debt load of state-owned firms.

Some big investors in the region still see a chance to pounce. Eashwar Krishnan, who runs the $3 billion Hong Kong-based Tybourne Capital Management (HK) Ltd., said in a note to investors earlier this month that he has been heartened by regulators’ efforts to clean up the market and is “now looking through the rubble for other diamonds in the rough” to bolster Tybourne’s sole A-shares position.

Mr. Krishnan, formerly the Asia head of Lone Pine Capital LLC, had previously steered clear of Chinese shares as Shanghai stocks doubled in a year due to Mr. Krishnan’s concerns over what he called “clear” market manipulation and a worrying surge in individual investors borrowing money to buy stocks. A firm spokesman didn’t respond to requests for comment.

The change by Bridgewater is a particularly sharp reversal. Mr. Dalio has gone out of his way in the past to praise Chinese President Xi Jinping and has compared the country’s economic environment to a patient undergoing a heart transplant by a skilled surgeon.

In a note to clients in June, Mr. Dalio said China’s problems “represent opportunities” because they give policy makers a chance to make positive reforms. As recently as earlier this month, Mr. Dalio wrote that the stock-market move was “not significantly reflective of, or influential on, the Chinese economy, Chinese investors, or foreign investors,” with the market still largely driven by a small pool of speculative investors in China.

But this week, Mr. Dalio said he was particularly alarmed about the psychological damage of the stock-market decline. While prices remain above their levels from two years ago, many ordinary investors are sitting on losses because they piled in more recently, he said.

“Even those who haven’t lost money in stocks will be affected psychologically by events, and those effects will have a depressive effect on economic activity,” Mr. Dalio wrote.

Write to Rob Copeland at rob.copeland@wsj.com and Mia Lamar at mia.lamar@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
econ_change of article is: irrelevant
###
article: "Iran’s Central Bank announced Wednesday that the nation would rename the national currency, the rial, as the “toman” and “delete four zeros” from its value.
The move follows months of intense American sanctions on Iran’s oil industry and mimics a similar move to bolster the bolívar currency in Venezuela.
“The council of ministers, at a meeting presided by President Hassan Rouhani this morning, approved the central bank’s proposed bill to change the national currency from the rial to the toman and delete four zeros,” the Iranian Islamic regime said in a media statement, according to the government news outlet PressTV. As the reevaluation of the currency must pass through the dictatorship’s rubber-stamp legislature, it will not be confirmed until a final vote in the Iranian parliament.
PressTV admitted the plan to remove the zeros, an attempt to strengthen the currency’s value, “found traction after the national currency lost more than 60 percent of its value in 2018,” after the United States withdrew from the international nuclear deal with Tehran. The outlet blamed Washington for sending the rial into a “tailspin” and prices of basic goods in the country “through the roof.”
The administration of President Donald Trump walked out of the nuclear deal, formally the 2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), after collecting significant evidence that Iran was violating the provisions of the deal and using its windfall from sanctions relief to fund Hezbollah, support Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad, and spread the influence of Shiite terrorist organizations throughout the Middle East and Latin America.
While the Central Bank of Iran blamed Trump for having to change the value of the rial, changing the currency’s name was reportedly a matter of convenience.
“The reversal to the toman – in use until the 1930s – does away with a duel denomination which many visitors of Iran find confusing. While the rial is the official name, Iranians still make their calculations in toman,” PressTV noted. One toman will still be worth 100 rials, potentially suggesting that the name change is also a way of making the true collapse of the rial’s value less obvious.
Abdolnaser Hemmati, the governor of the Central Bank of Iran, claimed in remarks to Iran’s Mehr news agency that economic instability in the country’s foreign exchange market was an “illusion” created by Iran’s enemies. Mehr claimed that the Iranian economy had already begun to improve even though “nothing is felt at supermarkets, chain stores, bazaars, etc.” Citing a domestic expert, Mehr claimed that the U.S. sanctions currently starving the Iranian elite “can be an opportunity for Iran to reduce its reliance on oil revenues and move towards an … indigenous economy.”
Iran’s oil exports have reportedly fallen by 77 percent currently, compared to the same timeframe last year. Its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) fell 4.9 percent over the fiscal year ending March 21 – significantly more than the World Bank’s prediction of a 1.9-percent drop.
The U.S.-funded Radio Farda reported last week that point-to-point inflation in Iran hit a record high that week at 48 percent, increasing at a slightly slower rate than it had in recent months but nonetheless significantly impacting the average Iranian’s ability to buy basic food and household goods.
“According to estimates made by the Iranian Statistical Center, a quarter of the income of an Iranian family is spent on foodstuff and beverages,” Radio Farda noted. “The increase in the price of food has been higher, nearly twofold, compared with other goods and services.”
In cutting zeros from the value of its national currency, Iran has adopted the policies of close ally Venezuela. Dictator Nicolás Maduro announced in March 2018 that, in response to the collapse of Venezuela’s economy after two decades of socialism, his government would cut three zeros from the value of the bolívar.
“I have decided to remove three zeroes from our currency and take all current currency out of circulation and instead implement a new currency with three fewer zeroes,” Maduro announced. Maduro ultimately removed five zeros, not three, and introduced the confusing “sovereign bolívar,” which triggered chaos at Venezuelan banks, as Maduro had also introduced a cryptocurrency, the “petro” recently to stabilize the economy.
Last month, Venezuela printed a 50,000-bolívar note to help citizens buy products, as their value has become too high to carry the necessary amount of money for purchases in a wallet. It is not clear at press time if the bolívar currently in circulation is the original or the “sovereign” variety.
Iran’s economy appears to be going the way of Venezuela’s after months of sanctions, which Tehran simultaneously claims have not harmed the glorious Islamic revolution while laying blame on them exclusively for the country’s economic woes. The sanctions, American officials have revealed, have damaged Iran’s ability to fund Shiite terrorist activities in the region that it invested heavily in following the signing of the JCPOA.
“Today by nearly every metric the regime and its proxies are weaker than when our pressure began. … Our pressure campaign is working. It is making Iran’s violent and expansionist foreign policy cost prohibitive,” Brian Hook, the State Department’s special representative for Iran, told Congress last month.
“In March, Hezbollah’s leader, Hassan Nasrallah, went on TV and made a public appeal for donations,” Hook noted. “Hezbollah has placed piggy banks in grocery stores and in retail outlets seeking the spare change of people.”
.
Please let us know if you're having issues with commenting."
econ_change of article is: irrelevant
###
article: "Scramble to safety upends bets by investors who were convinced three-decade-long rally in Treasurys was over

Updated Aug. 23, 2015 2:10 pm ET

Fresh jitters about the global economy are giving U.S. government bonds an unexpected boost, once again upending bets by investors who were convinced the three-decade-long rally in Treasurys was over.

The scramble for the safety of Treasurys—amid broader financial-market turmoil spurred by worries about the slowdown in China—has sent the yield on the benchmark 10-year note back toward 2%, its lowest since April. Many traders and investors say it is likely to pierce that level if concerns persist.

It is the latest setback for bond bears, who since the financial crisis have repeatedly called for Treasury prices to fall and yields to rise and have repeatedly been wrong. But some investors have profited after betting that uncertainty about the growth outlook and subdued inflation would keep demand for Treasurys high and yields low.

On Friday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average entered a correction, roughly defined as a drop of 10% from a recent peak, capping a tumultuous week in which global stock markets slumped and many emerging-market currencies hit record lows against the dollar. U.S. crude oil dipped below $40 a barrel for the first time since 2009, reviving worries about low inflation. The broad selloff in risk assets followed China’s decision to devalue its currency, triggering the yuan’s biggest fall in two decades.

The volatility has cast doubt on the Federal Reserve’s willingness to raise interest rates at its September meeting, a threat that has hung over the $12.8 trillion Treasury market. Higher rates make existing bonds less attractive.

“If at the beginning of the year, you told anyone that the Fed would be 50/50 about raising rates at their next meeting and the 10-year yield was approaching 2%, they would think you were nuts,’’ said Antonin Cronin, a Treasury bond trader at Société Générale SA.

Stubbornly low government-bond yields world-wide underscore soft global demand for goods and services as many countries have grappled with aging populations, falling productivity and restrained borrowing and lending since the financial crisis.

Treasury bonds maturing in 10 to 30 years have handed investors a total return, which reflects changes in price as well as interest payments, of 3.2% this month through Friday, according to Barclays PLC. Taking dividends into account, the S&P 500 lost 6.1% in the period, according to FactSet. Year-to-date, long-term Treasurys have returned 1.8% compared with negative 3% for the S&P 500. The last time bonds outperformed stocks over a full year was 2011.

“Bond bears have misread economic growth. They have misread inflation data,’’ said Bob Andres, founder and chief investment officer of Andres Capital Management, which oversees more than $100 million in assets. “I think the U.S. economy will be in a slow-growth mode for longer than most observers believe.”

On Friday, the yield on the 10-year Treasury, a benchmark that guides borrowing costs for consumers, companies and governments, dropped to 2.052% from 2.084% on Thursday. The 10-year yield hit its 2015 peak of 2.5% in June, and started the year at 2.173%. Yields fall when bond prices rise.

Zhiwei Ren, portfolio manager at Penn Mutual Asset Management Inc., began wagering against U.S. government bonds at the start of the year. The bet at first paid off but then began to sour earlier this summer as a flare-up in the Greek debt crisis and a selloff in Chinese stocks drove investors into Treasurys. Mr. Ren, whose firm manages $20 billion in assets, got out in July, when the 10-year yield was 2.3%.

“I felt like it was risky staying in the crowd and fighting against the bond market,” said Mr. Ren. “The lower the yields go, the bigger you are going to suffer in terms of performance. It was time to get out.”

It isn’t the first time bearish bond investors have come away disappointed. In 2013, yields jumped as the Fed prepared to rein in its bond-buying program amid a strengthening U.S. economy. But yields fell again last year amid expectations that central banks in Europe and Japan would pursue easing measures to stoke growth. The Bank of Japan expanded its stimulus measures in October 2014, while the European Central Bank began purchases in March.

Earlier this year, betting on higher bonds yields seemed like the sensible move for many investors. The pace of U.S. economic growth had picked up after hitting a soft patch, and a solid jobs market bolstered the case for the Fed to start raising rates for the first time since 2006 sometime this year.

In recent weeks, though, many money managers who had less money allocated to Treasurys than suggested by benchmark indexes have bought bonds to come back in line, according to traders. Some investors who bet against Treasurys by going short had to scoop up bonds to close out their position, contributing to the buying pressure.

“If you have been shorting the bond market, you have been destroyed,” said Charles Comiskey, head of Treasury trading at Bank of Nova Scotia in New York. ”For those who were long the market, you have made a killing.”

To be sure, some investors are skeptical that there is much more room for the 10-year yield to fall. If policy makers take actions to soothe investors’ fears about markets and growth, demand for haven assets could wane, sending yields higher. On Sunday, the The Wall Street Journal reported that China’s central bank is preparing to bolster liquidity in the country’s banking system.

Ashish Shah, head of global credit at AllianceBernstein, which has $486 billion in assets under management, has added Treasury bonds to his portfolio in recent months but is now leaning toward selling to book profits.

Bets on long-term Treasury bonds have been particularly lucrative. John Bellows, portfolio manager at Western Asset Management Co., which has $452.5 billion in assets under management, started to buy long-term Treasury bonds before the 10-year yield hit this year’s peak of 2.5% in June. For many, that seemed a risky move, because the consensus at that time was that the yield would continue to march toward 3%. But he believes the yields can’t go steadily higher because inflation is nearly “nonexistent.”

Inflation erodes bonds’ value over time. Long-term bonds are vulnerable to changing views on inflation, while short-term bonds are more sensitive to shifts in the outlook on the Fed’s rate policy.

“It has been profitable,’’ Mr. Bellows said of the bet, but he declined to disclose how much he made. “Many feared at that time yields are going to keep rising. But without inflation, it is hard for yields to rise sustainably.”

Write to Min Zeng at min.zeng@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "Government-bond selloff causes ripple through financial markets

Updated Sept. 12, 2016 7:06 pm ET

The selloff may have fizzled out, but it was enough to put markets on notice.

Investors now are asking whether markets are on the verge of another bond-market “tantrum,” in which yields rise sharply as prices fall. So far, most conclude the risk remains low, on expectations that weak growth and inflation will mean central banks continue to deliver aggressive stimulus.

But the steep declines that escalated Friday and resumed in early trading Monday were a signal that more volatility could loom.

The Dow industrials rebounded 239.62 points Monday, and yields on benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasurys stabilized, after Federal Reserve governor Lael Brainard argued for a cautious approach to raising rates. The comments helped ease fears of higher interest rates sparked by another Fed official Friday.

The quick back-and-forth showed how leveraged the market has become to continued largess from central banks. Concerns about whether that support will continue have hit the bond market, where investors pushed yields on government debt in several countries into negative territory over the summer—meaning they were paying more for bonds than they would ultimately get back.

“Nobody has been buying on fundamentals, but on technicals,” said Mark Dowding, co-head of investment-grade at BlueBay Asset Management. “And the dominant technical has been central banks being massive buyers of assets.”

The yield on the 10-year German government bond touched a high of 0.057% Monday morning, according to Tradeweb, and finished at 0.037%, its highest close since late June when the U.K.’s vote to leave the European Union triggered a rush to safety. In Japan, yields on the 10-year government bond hovered just below zero, up from a low of minus-0.29% in late July. In the U.S., the 10-year Treasury yield was unchanged at 1.671%.

The Stoxx Europe 600 index declined 1%, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng Index skidded 3.4% and Japan’s Nikkei Stock Average fell 1.7%.

The increase in government-bond yields reverses only a portion of the tremendous drop recorded in recent years. Central banks have fueled that rally by keeping interest rates at record lows, or knocking them into negative territory, and in some cases launching huge bond-buying programs. At the start of 2016, yields in the U.S., U.K., Germany and Japan all were higher than they are today.

The recent selloff started Thursday after European Central Bank President Mario Draghi declined to commit to extending the bank’s €80 billion ($89.9 billion) in monthly asset purchases, which are slated to end in March 2017.

Investors also are concerned that the Bank of Japan is nearing the limit of its bond-buying program and may reduce its purchases of the country’s long-dated government debt.

That has upended a conviction that has shaped financial markets over the past two years: that central banks would keep on easing monetary policy.

Investors are looking at past tantrums for clues to how this selloff may play out.

Sovereign bonds around the world also fell sharply in the spring of 2015. The yield on the 10-year German bund rose from just above zero that April to just below 1% that June, as prices plunged.

That selloff wasn’t driven by any particular market event or signs of a meaningful economic reversal. Yields soon began to fall again.

While the increase in yields this time around has been smaller so far, investors do expect it to continue. Francesco Garzarelli, co-head of global macro and markets research at Goldman Sachs Group Inc., predicts the 10-year Treasury yield will rise to 2% by the end of the year. BlueBay’s Mr. Dowding said 10-year German yields could rise an additional 0.2 to 0.3 percentage point.

“In relation to expectations for the economy, these bond yields are very low,” Mr. Garzarelli said. “We’ve now passed the most extreme valuation levels, but we’re still at levels that look quite dire relative to the macro outlook.”

But many investors don’t expect the sort of big move in yields that happened in the spring last year. That is because the factors that have encouraged central banks to act—slow growth and low inflation—haven’t gone away, particularly in the eurozone and Japan. Central-bank bond buying is aimed at boosting growth and inflation by driving down bond yields and pushing investors into riskier assets, and by prodding banks into lending more.

“Broadly speaking, we’re still dealing with the same underlying fundamentals, and that’s not likely to change,” said Charlie Diebel, head of interest rates at Aviva Investors.

“Skepticism over the effectiveness of [quantitative easing] is more entrenched this year, and wage inflation is simply not coming through,” added Jack Kelly, an investment director at Standard Life Investments.

Write to Christopher Whittall at christopher.whittall@wsj.com and Mike Bird at Mike. Bird@wsj.com

Corrections & Amplifications: The yield on the 10-year German government bond touched a high of 0.057% on Monday morning and finished at 0.037%. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said the bond’s yield touched a high of 0.57% and closed at 0.37%. (Sept. 12, 2016)

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8

Appeared in the September 13, 2016, print edition as 'Yield Jump Stirs Up New ‘Tantrum’ Fear'."
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "WASHINGTON — In a ballroom across from the Capitol building, an unlikely group of military hawks, populist crusaders, Chinese Muslim freedom fighters and followers of the Falun Gong has been meeting to warn anyone who will listen that China poses an existential threat to the United States that will not end until the Communist Party is overthrown.
If the warnings sound straight out of the Cold War, they are. The Committee on the Present Danger, a long-defunct group that campaigned against the dangers of the Soviet Union in the 1970s and 1980s, has recently been revived with the help of Stephen K. Bannon, the president’s former chief strategist, to warn against the dangers of China.
Once dismissed as xenophobes and fringe elements, the group’s members are finding their views increasingly embraced in President Trump’s Washington, where skepticism and mistrust of China have taken hold. Fear of China has spread across the government, from the White House to Congress to federal agencies, where Beijing’s rise is unquestioningly viewed as an economic and national security threat and the defining challenge of the 21st century.
“These are two systems that are incompatible,” Mr. Bannon said of the United States and China. “One side is going to win, and one side is going to lose.”
The United States and China have been locked in difficult trade negotiations for the past two years, with talks plagued by a series of missteps and misunderstandings. Mr. Trump has responded to the lack of progress by steadily ratcheting up American tariffs on Chinese goods and finding other ways to retaliate. China has responded in kind.
The two sides now appear far from any agreement that would resolve the administration’s concerns about China, including forcing American companies operating there to hand over valuable technology. Even if a deal is reached, the two sides are busy constructing broader economic barriers.
In addition to placing a 25 percent tariff on roughly half of the goods China exports, the United States has restricted the kinds of technologies that can be exported to China, tried to cut off some Chinese companies, like telecom giant Huawei, from purchasing American products and rolled out hurdles for Chinese investment in the United States.
American intelligence agencies have also ratcheted up efforts to combat Chinese espionage, particularly at universities and research institutions. Officials from the F.B.I. and the National Security Council have been dispatched to Ivy League universities to warn administrators to be vigilant against Chinese students who may be gathering technological secrets from their laboratories to pass to Beijing.
The administration paints the crackdown as necessary to protect the United States. But there are growing concerns that it is stoking a new red scare, fueling discrimination against students, scientists and companies with ties to China and risking the collapse of a fraught but deeply enmeshed trade relationship between the world’s two largest economies.
“I’m worried that some people are going to say, because of this fear, any policy is justifiable,” said Scott Kennedy, a China expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. “The climate of fear that is being created needs to help generate the conversation, not end the conversation.”
Anti-China sentiment has spread quickly, with Republicans and Democrats, labor union leaders, Fox News hosts and others warning that China’s efforts to build up its military and advanced industries threaten America’s global leadership, and that the United States should respond aggressively. Skepticism has seeped into nearly every aspect of China’s interaction with the United States, with officials questioning China’s presence on American stock markets, its construction of American subway cars and its purchase of social media networks.
Yet there is little agreement on what America can or should do. The United States has tried for decades to entice and cajole China to become a more open society, but the Communist Party has steadily tightened its grip over the Chinese people and the economy. American leaders now face a choice of whether to continue down a path of engagement that could leave the country vulnerable to economic and security threats — or embark on a path of disengagement that could weaken both economies and might one day even lead to war.
An increasing number of people in Washington now view the decoupling of the two economies as inevitable — including many of the members of the Committee on the Present Danger. At an inaugural meeting in April, Mr. Bannon, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker, and others issued paeans to Ronald Reagan — a former member of the group — and were met with standing ovations as they called for vigilance against China.
They praised Mr. Reagan’s Cold War victory over the Soviet Union and his doctrine of “peace through strength,” but there was also an air of inevitability that war might come, only this time with China.
Mr. Bannon was just off the plane from Rome, with a slight shadow of a mustache and his silver hair brushed back. Clad in a black button-down and long black suit jacket, he thumped the podium as he described China as a rising power and the United States as a declining power that would inevitably clash.
“This is the defining event of our time, and 100 years from now, this is what they’re going to remember us for,” he said.
The committee’s two earliest iterations, in the 1950s and again in the 1970s, called for an arms buildup to counter the Soviets. The second iteration, formed over a luncheon table at Washington’s Metropolitan Club in 1976, issued documents warning against Soviet expansionism, with titles like “Is America Becoming Number 2?”
The group reached the height of its influence during the Reagan administration, in which dozens of its members eventually held posts, including as the national security adviser and C.I.A. director. But as the Soviet threat faded, so did the committee.
The group was briefly active again starting in 2004, this time to warn against the threat of Islamic extremism. The committee’s vice chair, Frank Gaffney, is the founder of the Center for Security Policy, a think tank that argues that mosques and Muslims across America are engaged in a “stealth jihad” to “Islamize” the country by taking advantage of American pluralism and democracy.
The group’s activity largely died down until concern over China rekindled interest.
Today’s committee acknowledges that the threat from China is different from Soviet Russia because the American and Chinese economies are much more integrated. But Washington is increasingly reaching back into the Cold War toolbox to confront the threat.
The administration has placed Chinese tech companies on an “entity list,” essentially blacklisting them from doing business with American firms. In keeping with a law passed last year, the administration has increased its checks of Chinese investment, including of minority stakes in American companies. Last June, the administration began restricting visas for Chinese graduate students in sensitive research fields like robotics and aviation. And the United States has begun barring Chinese academics from the United States if they are suspected of having links to Chinese intelligence agencies.
“They’re not the Soviet Union. But this kind of government control, statism, never works for long,” Larry Kudlow, the White House chief economic adviser, said in a July 16 interview with Sinclair Broadcast Group. The possibility that China could collapse like the Soviet Union has “always been an undercurrent” in the trade war, he said.
The new Cold War has not been one-sided. Many of the changes in Washington have been triggered by a darker turn in Beijing.
China has increased its scrutiny of American firms, and many American companies and their employees in China now fear reprisal. In addition to detaining millions of Chinese Muslims, democracy activists and others, Chinese authorities have jailed foreign diplomats, academics and businesspeople — prompting some to cancel or delay trips to China.
China is also projecting its power abroad, funding global infrastructure and constructing an archipelago of artificial islands with giant air bases reaching almost to the shores of Malaysia and Indonesia. Beijing has made it clear that it intends to help its companies dominate the industries of the future, from artificial intelligence and supercomputers to aerospace equipment. Its policies have sought to replace imports of high-tech products with Chinese-made goods, pressuring multinationals to move factories from the United States and resulting in the loss of American jobs.
China has rejected entreaties by the Trump administration to curb these activities, arguing that it is simply pursuing its own economic development. In an interview after trade talks broke down in May, Liu He, China’s top negotiator, said that areas of disagreement between the United States and China focused on “major matters of principle” on which China was unlikely to bend.
The chill in relations has begun to weigh on Chinese investment in the United States, along with Chinese students and tourism. Chinese investment in American residential and commercial real estate has begun to decline. Companies are increasingly diversifying away from China, wary of the president’s ongoing economic war.
Nintendo, GoPro, Hasbro and other companies are reconsidering factories in China, choosing to source products from Vietnam, the United States, Mexico and India instead.
Susan Shirk, the chair of the 21st Century China Center at the University of California at San Diego, said the United States is at risk of being gripped by “an anti-Chinese version of the Red Scare” that is driving Chinese talent away and could rupture what little good will is left between the two countries.
“We’ve made this mistake once before, during the Cold War,” Ms. Shirk said. “And I don’t think we should make it again.”
Chinese nationals and Americans of Chinese heritage say they have felt the chilling effects. Some suspect they are being passed over for promotions and grants. Supporters of engagement have been dismissed as apologists or even traitors.
“Chinese Americans feel targeted,” said Charlie Woo, chief executive of Megatoys and a member of the Committee of 100, an organization of prominent Chinese-Americans. “And that’s really hurtful.”
The Trump administration and the Committee on the Present Danger have been careful to say their targets are the Chinese government and the Communist Party, not the Chinese people. But the distinction can be a difficult one to make. In the rush to protect against new threats from China, the line between preparedness and paranoia is sometimes unclear.
At a Senate hearing last year, Christopher A. Wray, the F.B.I. director, said the Trump administration was trying to “view the China threat as not just a whole-of-government threat, but a whole-of-society threat,” adding, “I think it’s going to take a whole-of-society response by us.”
Many Chinese people and their defenders have bristled at the implication that the entire Chinese society poses a national security threat.
Toby Smith, vice president for policy at the Association for American Universities, said that American universities were working hard to remain vigilant to espionage threats, but that they thrive on openness and access to talent and science from around the world — including from China.
“The situation with China is different than the Cold War,” he said. “The concern with the Soviet Union was primarily military. Now it’s a concern about economic competitiveness.”"
econ_change of article is: unsure
###
article: "Advertisement
Supported by
In Nevada, Unemployed Workers Wait for Aid That Will Still Not Be Enough
Stimulus checks may be on their way, but those struggling to get by worry that the money will soon be gone. “Every morning I wake up thinking about where my help is going to come from,” one woman said.
LAS VEGAS — Bobby Hernandez plans to spend his stimulus check on medication to manage his diabetes. Wilma Estrella will use hers to pay the electricity bill. Lizbeth Ramos intends to catch up on the rent, though the money will not be enough to cover all that she owes.
They are hardly alone: No state’s work force has been battered as badly by the coronavirus pandemic as Nevada’s, and people are especially struggling in Las Vegas, a boom-and-bust city where tourist dollars and lavish tips have given way to shuttered hotels and weed-strewn parking lots.
It is hard to remember the level of optimism and exuberance that prevailed here a year ago, as presidential hopefuls traipsed through the state for the Democratic caucuses. The economy had roared back from the Great Recession, and it could seem that growth was limitless.
Today, the grim desperation is softened only by the hope that vaccinations will bring tourists eager to celebrate and spend. Though most casinos have reopened, they have a small fraction of the tourists they once did. Many restaurants have shuttered their doors for good, and those that are open are at limited capacity.
As a result, a year into the pandemic, Las Vegas has the highest unemployment rate among large cities, with more than 10 percent out of work, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and over the last year the work force in Nevada has lost more income than in any other state.
For many, the only thing that cushioned the blow was the federal stimulus checks. Now more money is on the way: The $1.9 trillion relief bill that President Biden signed Thursday would direct about $4 billion to the state. Vice President Kamala Harris plans to visit the city Monday, part of the administration’s effort to rally public support for the measure.
But for those scraping to get by, the promise of another stimulus payment has not relieved the anxiety of knowing that, no matter how much it helps, it will almost certainly fall short.
“I feel pretty scared every day, right now, whenever I think about my bills,” Ms. Ramos, a 32-year-old waitress, said as she loaded bags from a food pantry into her trunk on a recent afternoon. “Basically every morning I wake up thinking about where my help is going to come from — is it here? Is it the government? I don’t really know who is looking out for people like me.”
Because the economy relies so heavily on tourism and the service industry, Nevada — and Las Vegas particularly — is one of the most economically vulnerable parts of the country. The coronavirus pushed the state to an economic cliff even more dramatically than the recession did a decade ago.
Last year, the Democratic-controlled Legislature slashed some $1.2 billion from the state budget, stopping construction projects and cutting funding to the health budget. In April, Nevada registered unemployment of 29.5 percent, higher than in any state in any month since the Bureau of Labor Statistics started tracking state unemployment rates in 1976.
The downturn has many Nevadans scrambling to keep up. Roughly one million Nevada residents, some 45 percent of adults in the state, have fallen behind on basic household expenses, according to an analysis by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a liberal research group.
One of them is MaryAnn Bautista, a single mother of five. She said she could still remember the shock she felt a year ago, when managers at the hotel where she worked told her she was being laid off. She could not hold back tears as she finished her shift at the buffet there. When a couple of customers asked if they could help, she could only shake her head.
In the last year, she has received help from her adult children, food banks and a program run by her union to help her cover one month’s rent. She receives unemployment as well.
But what Ms. Bautista wants most is the job she held for more than 17 years, which she will lose permanently unless she is called in for a shift in the next week. (Under the union contract, she is entitled to the same job and seniority if she is called back to work within a year — after that, the claim to the job evaporates.)
“I struggle so much, I lie awake in bed calculating what I can pay this time, what can wait a little longer?” she said.
Ms. Bautista is particularly pained by the fact that her teenage daughter has begun working as much as 40 hours a week at a local amusement park to try to help pay the bills. “There’s no way out of this until I have a job,” she said. “That’s what I think every time I break down.”
Even as infection rates decline, there are signs that the economy could sour again — nearly 100,000 fewer residents in the state had jobs last month compared to February of last year. Employment is even worse for low-wage workers, dropping some 23 percent among residents who earn less than $27,000 a year, according to the Center for American Progress. Claims for unemployment insurance are more than triple what they were in 2019, the study found.
And it is unclear whether the glittery city will ever return to its prepandemic heyday. After the longtime casino magnate Sheldon Adelson died in January, his company sold off both of its Las Vegas properties, saying it would concentrate on its businesses in Asia.
“We’re in a world of hurt here in terms of Las Vegas,” Rob Goldstein, the president and chief executive of the company, Las Vegas Sands, said in July. “I’ve never felt more gloomy than I do today about what’s happening in Las Vegas.”
A little more than a year ago, the ballroom at the Culinary Academy of Las Vegas played host to presidential candidates, there to talk with leaders from the most powerful labor union in the state and one of the most politically powerful in the country. Today, the ballroom is covered with onion skins and dried beans, as dozens of workers pack boxes brimming with food for out-of-work union members. Roughly half of all members are still without a job — an improvement from last spring, when more than 90 percent of them did not have work.
Frequently Asked Questions About the New Stimulus Package
The stimulus payments would be $1,400 for most recipients. Those who are eligible would also receive an identical payment for each of their children. To qualify for the full $1,400, a single person would need an adjusted gross income of $75,000 or below. For heads of household, adjusted gross income would need to be $112,500 or below, and for married couples filing jointly that number would need to be $150,000 or below. To be eligible for a payment, a person must have a Social Security number. Read more.
Buying insurance through the government program known as COBRA would temporarily become a lot cheaper. COBRA, for the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, generally lets someone who loses a job buy coverage via the former employer. But it’s expensive: Under normal circumstances, a person may have to pay at least 102 percent of the cost of the premium. Under the relief bill, the government would pay the entire COBRA premium from April 1 through Sept. 30. A person who qualified for new, employer-based health insurance someplace else before Sept. 30 would lose eligibility for the no-cost coverage. And someone who left a job voluntarily would not be eligible, either. Read more
This credit, which helps working families offset the cost of care for children under 13 and other dependents, would be significantly expanded for a single year. More people would be eligible, and many recipients would get a bigger break. The bill would also make the credit fully refundable, which means you could collect the money as a refund even if your tax bill was zero. “That will be helpful to people at the lower end” of the income scale, said Mark Luscombe, principal federal tax analyst at Wolters Kluwer Tax & Accounting. Read more.
There would be a big one for people who already have debt. You wouldn’t have to pay income taxes on forgiven debt if you qualify for loan forgiveness or cancellation — for example, if you’ve been in an income-driven repayment plan for the requisite number of years, if your school defrauded you or if Congress or the president wipes away $10,000 of debt for large numbers of people. This would be the case for debt forgiven between Jan. 1, 2021, and the end of 2025. Read more.
The bill would provide billions of dollars in rental and utility assistance to people who are struggling and in danger of being evicted from their homes. About $27 billion would go toward emergency rental assistance. The vast majority of it would replenish the so-called Coronavirus Relief Fund, created by the CARES Act and distributed through state, local and tribal governments, according to the National Low Income Housing Coalition. That’s on top of the $25 billion in assistance provided by the relief package passed in December. To receive financial assistance — which could be used for rent, utilities and other housing expenses — households would have to meet several conditions. Household income could not exceed 80 percent of the area median income, at least one household member must be at risk of homelessness or housing instability, and individuals would have to qualify for unemployment benefits or have experienced financial hardship (directly or indirectly) because of the pandemic. Assistance could be provided for up to 18 months, according to the National Low Income Housing Coalition. Lower-income families that have been unemployed for three months or more would be given priority for assistance. Read more.
“We never ever have had something like this before,” said Geoconda Argüello-Kline, the head of the union, Culinary Workers Local 226. “We have more need than ever and we have to realize this is an emergency. The Democrats always say they are for working people, so we elect them, and now we expect them to find more ways to help in this crisis.”
Late last year, Guadalupe Rodriguez left the home she had rented for more than a decade and moved into a ranch-style home with one of her co-workers from the Strat hotel. Both were laid off last March. Along with another roommate, they are cobbling together enough money to pay the mortgage and household bills. But she finds it hard not to grow angry at the government.
“I have not asked for much my entire life, but now we need the help,” Ms. Rodriguez said.
She could not receive any of the stimulus money last year, she said, because she was married at the time to an undocumented immigrant. This time around, she will receive a check, but in her mind it has been spent before it even arrives. “It feels like they do these things, they get attention, but the money won’t stay,” she said. “We will be hurting again tomorrow.”
The short bursts of cash from stimulus checks create a cyclical living experience, as the relief of being able to make some payments or buy food gives way to the anxiety of bills to come.
“Stimulus money shortens the line for food from a food pantry and when it evaporates, the lines get longer again,” said Larry Scott, the chief operating officer for Three Square Food Bank, the largest in Southern Nevada. “We’re going to have a protracted, long, long recovery here. What the politicians should be concentrating on is more than a short-term solution. Rather than a lot of money at a short time, we should have more money over a longer period of time.”
The pain is also disproportionately hurting those who can least afford it, sending families who were already teetering close to poverty to the streets; families living in tents now inhabit the freeway underpasses throughout the region.
Ms. Bautista, the single mother of five, knows she is one of the lucky ones. She signed up for and received unemployment checks within weeks, while some of her former co-workers were caught up in the system for months.
Typically, she has just enough to cover the roughly $2,000 she has to pay for rent, car insurance and medical bills. She has managed to send a few checks to her mother in the Philippines, as she has done for the last two decades.
“I came here to work, and I devoted my life to this community,” she said, as tears streaked her cheeks. “This is our life that we have, and we cannot always rely on handouts.”
Ms. Bautista said she would spend her stimulus money stocking up on food and helping her children out with their bills. “We appreciate the help,” she said of the government aid. “Don’t get me wrong. We do appreciate that, but we cannot rely on it. We want job assurance.”
“If I have my job, I’m not going to be scared, because I know I can deal with all of this,” she added. “I’m going to have money to pay for my bills.”
Advertisement"
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "The Trump administration announced plans Thursday to freeze fuel-efficiency requirements for the nation’s cars and trucks through 2026 — a massive regulatory rollback likely to spur a legal battle with California and other states, as well as create potential upheaval in the nation’s automotive market.
The proposal represents an abrupt reversal of the approach during the Obama administration, when regulators argued that requiring more-fuel-efficient vehicles would improve public health, combat climate change and save consumers money without compromising safety.
President Trump’s plan also would attempt to revoke California’s long-standing legal ability to set its own, more stringent tailpipe standards and restrict the ability of other states to follow its lead.
During the Obama administration, the federal government worked with California and the auto industry to craft a uniform set of national fuel-economy standards. The White House’s latest proposal threatens to blow up that delicate compromise.
If California were to prevail in the likely legal clash to come, the state could set tougher standards than the federal government, leaving automakers with the prospect of manufacturing vehicles that meet different rules in different states — something the industry has said it does not want.
On Thursday, a group of 19 attorneys general joined California Attorney General Xavier Becerra (D), who vowed that the state would “use every legal tool at its disposal to defend today’s national standards and reaffirm the facts and science behind them.”
California Gov. Jerry Brown (D) was more emphatic, saying his state “will fight this stupidity in every conceivable way possible.”
State leaders from both parties have backed California’s right to set its own tailpipe standards, and 13 states and the District of Columbia have adopted California’s standards in recent years.
“The reporting that we’re reversing Obama-era fuel-efficiency standards and preempting the tougher California standards is simply false,” White House spokeswoman Sarah Huckabee Sanders said Thursday, adding that the proposal released Thursday detailed a range of possible options in addition to the administration’s preferred path. “We’re simply opening it up for a comment period, and we’ll make a final decision at the end of that.”
Bill Wehrum, the Environmental Protection Agency’s assistant administrator for the Office of Air and Radiation, said officials in Washington and California had agreed earlier that once the proposal was made public, “we’re all going to get together again and begin talking in earnest about whether we can find that middle ground.”
The Trump administration’s proposal argues that forcing automakers to increase the fuel economy of their fleets to reach an average of roughly 54 miles per gallon by 2025, as the Obama administration proposed in 2012, would make new vehicles more expensive and encourage people to drive older, less-safe cars and trucks.
The new analysis, published jointly by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and the EPA, estimates that halting fuel-efficiency targets at 2020 levels could save $500 billion in “societal costs,” avert thousands of highway fatalities and save an estimated $2,340 on each new automobile.
It acknowledges that easing the Obama-era standards would increase U.S. fuel consumption by roughly half a million barrels of oil per day, an increase of 2 to 3 percent, and would lead to an increase in greenhouse-gas emissions.
Public-health experts and environmental groups condemned the White House proposal, arguing that it ignores the health benefits from less-polluting cars and would lead people to spend more money at the gas pump. They said the rollback would allow more carbon dioxide to spew from the nation’s vehicles, squandering a chance to combat climate change in the transportation sector, which has emerged as the nation’s largest source of carbon dioxide emissions.
“By 2030, the pollution equivalent of this rollback will be like firing up 30 coal power plants,” Paul Cort, a lawyer with the group Earthjustice, said in a statement. “It’s a boon for big oil that ordinary Americans will pay for with their health and their wallets.”
Some automakers have expressed unease about an abrupt freezing of fuel-economy standards and the specter of having to meet different requirements in different states. Industry representatives commended the Trump administration Thursday for putting out multiple options for public comment but stressed that they continue to support fuel-economy increases.
“With today’s release of the Administration’s proposals, it’s time for substantive negotiations to begin,” Gloria Bergquist, spokeswoman for the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, said in a statement. “We urge California and the federal government to find a common-sense solution that sets continued increases in vehicle efficiency standards while also meeting the needs of America’s drivers.”
Ross Eisenberg, vice president for energy and resources policy at the National Association of Manufacturers, said that while the industry wanted to revisit the Obama-era standards, “ultimately, manufacturers need a single national program that provides regulatory certainty and maintains vehicle affordability.”
Karl Brauer, executive publisher of Autotrader and Kelley Blue Book, said in a statement that the unpredictable outcome of the legal and regulatory wrangling ahead “will keep courtrooms busy and boardrooms nervous for the foreseeable future.”
The Trump administration’s push to ease fuel-economy standards got a warm reception from several Republican lawmakers and oil and gas interests.
“What started as a mandate in the mid-1970’s to reduce foreign imports of oil morphed into a costly and unworkable environmental regulation thanks to bureaucrats in the previous administration and in Sacramento,” Thomas J. Pyle, president of the free-market American Energy Alliance advocacy group, said in a statement. “President Trump should be commended for standing up for American consumers by reducing the regulatory burden placed unnecessarily on automakers.”
In recent years, as gas prices remained low, Americans have shown a clear preference for larger vehicles. Data shows that Ford’s F-series trucks are the best-selling vehicles in the United States, followed by Chevrolet and Ram pickups and a collection of SUVs. Further down the list are smaller vehicles such as the Honda Civic and Toyota Corolla.
Trump administration officials fought for weeks behind the scenes over the details of how to relax Obama-era standards. Top officials at the Transportation Department and the EPA clashed over whether the White House’s justifications for the new policy can stand up to legal scrutiny.
In one recent internal presentation, part of which was obtained by The Washington Post, officials at the EPA’s Office of Transportation and Air Quality warned that the proposal at that point contained “a wide range of errors, use of outdated data, and unsupported assumptions.”
Ultimately, the two agencies published Thursday’s proposal jointly, and acting EPA administrator Andrew Wheeler publicly defended the proposal this week, including during testimony before the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee.
Over thousands of pages, the administration proposal argues that the costs of meeting federal mileage requirements over the next few years would boost the sticker price of vehicles, prompting people to continue driving older cars and trucks rather than buying newer, more efficient ones. That would in turn increase the risk of accidents, it says.
EPA officials questioned some of those estimates, as well as the Transportation Department’s idea that officials could block California from imposing its own, tougher vehicle tailpipe standards on the grounds that a 1975 energy law reserved that right for the federal government.
One key proponent of the new plan is Deputy Transportation Secretary Jeffrey Rosen, who oversees the department’s deregulatory efforts. NHTSA Deputy Administrator Heidi King also helped scale back the fuel-efficiency regulations, which were among the Obama administration’s most significant climate-change initiatives.
“The unrealistic goals set in 2012 have to change to reflect the information available to us now,” King told reporters Thursday. Responding to a critique of the proposal’s foundations from some within the EPA, King said she encourages a “rigorous review” of the numbers used in the plan and noted that “it’s been a great pleasure” working with EPA and Transportation Department experts.
The administration argues that its proposal to freeze the fleetwide average of 37 miles per gallon in 2020 would prevent roughly 12,700 traffic fatalities in vehicles built through model year 2029. But some experts said those numbers appeared based on difficult-to-decipher analytical approaches.
Trump’s sparring over trade with Mexico, Canada and much of the rest of the world, his steel and aluminum tariffs and his threat to impose 25 percent auto-related tariffs have exacerbated automakers’ concerns. The automobile tariffs alone could add thousands of dollars to the price of a car, General Motors told regulators this month.
In 2016, the EPA estimated that complying with the tighter tailpipe standards would cost roughly $900 per car by 2025, with NHTSA putting the figure at $1,200. Two years later, Trump officials argue that keeping the Obama-era standards could raise costs by more than $2,300 per vehicle.
Last year, 37,150 people died on U.S. roads, and several factors contributed far more to that toll than any potential impact related to tailpipe regulations. More than half of all road deaths were connected to drunken driving or speeding, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The Trump administration said Thursday that it will accept public comment on its latest proposal for 60 days. NHTSA and the EPA plan to hold public hearings in Washington, Detroit and Los Angeles.
Read more
Trump administration to freeze fuel-efficiency standards and fight states
Official who crafted new car rules wouldn’t say whether humans cause climate change
EPA reverses course, says it will enforce new pollution limits for glider"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "CUMBERLAND, Ky. — Sitting in lawn chairs plopped in the middle of train tracks, two coal miners smoked and chewed tobacco to pass the time. There’s been little else to do here for the past four weeks, except wave at motorists who honk in support of these homegrown heroes waging a national struggle over workers’ rights.
Since Chris Rowe and Chris Sexton were laid off from their mining jobs this summer along with 300 co-workers, they have been camped out here in the mountains of eastern Kentucky, blocking a train car full of coal from going to market. Their protest is against coal company Blackjewel, which halted operations in July without settling its final salary obligations to Rowe, Sexton and an estimated 1,800 other workers across the country. But it’s also become a declaration against corporate bankruptcy laws that they say deprioritize workers’ interests.
“The same situation may have happened to others, but we are the ones making a stand,” said Rowe, 35, who was laid off days after he purchased his first house. “We mined the coal and broke our backs to get that coal, so that coal belongs to us until they pay for it.”
Blackjewel is part of the latest spate of coal producers to file for bankruptcy, a trend that has lingered under President Trump as the nation’s appetite for coal has continued to shrink. The Trump administration’s rollback of environmental regulations implemented under Obama have failed to spark a revival in communities like Cumberland that formed his political base during the 2016 election.
Cumberland is located in Harlan County, where Trump won 85 percent of the vote. But these miners say their fight isn’t a political one. At the camp, there is an informal policy against speaking about Trump or partisan issues, underscoring the president’s continued popularity in areas where the local economy has continued to suffer.
“That is the main reason we have gotten as far as we’ve got now; it’s because we have kept the nonsense down,” Rowe said, referring to the nation’s divisive political debate.
Although the number of Americans employed in the coal industry nationwide has remained relatively steady since Trump took office, analysts say the industry faces a rocky future as energy suppliers continue to shift toward renewable sources and relatively low-cost natural gas. Annual U.S. coal production is expected to drop from 711 million tons to less than 600 million tons during the next five years, said Gregory Marmon, a principal coal analyst at global consulting firm Wood Mackenzie.
“The administration has definitely pulled back regulations, and that has stopped some of the bleeding, but renewable energy is so cost-effective, and natural gas prices are so low, the pulling back of some regulations has not been able to stop the decline of coal,” Marmon said.
[In small towns across the nation, the death of a coal plant leaves an unmistakable void]
Blackjewel, which operated mines in Kentucky, Virginia, West Virginia and Wyoming, abruptly announced July 1 that it was shutting down operations. Paychecks bounced or were clawed out of miners’ accounts. Other paychecks were never issued.
“We had just bought a washer, and then the bank pulled the money back out, and it made our account negative,” said Stacy Rowe, Chris Rowe’s wife.
The effect of those missed paychecks has rippled through the county’s economy. Many of the miners made $20 to $30 an hour, a middle-class salary in a county where the household median income is $24,000 a year, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.
Upset that the product of his labor was about to leave town while his bank account showed a negative balance of $2,100, Sexton phoned Rowe and other miners to stop the coal train on July 29, an act of defiance that continues today.
After a tense standoff with Kentucky State Police troopers, the rail cars remained stationary and the miners were permitted to continue their protest. The workers have erected blue and white tarps along the rail tracks to create a makeshift kitchen, children’s playroom, and a space to collect donated clothes and canned goods. Portable toilets have been trucked in. Each night, miners pitch tents or sleep in their trucks to avoid the coyotes and black bears that pass these rail tracks parallel to a tributary of the Cumberland River named “Poor Fork.”
“If that train leaves, we ain’t got nothing,” said Sexton, 30, who said Blackjewel owes him about $5,000. “This is all we got left, because we mined it and still ain’t got paid for it.”
The Labor Department has sought an injunction to prevent Blackjewel from moving the rail car, which is estimated to have about $1 million in coal, according to local media reports.
Meanwhile, a team of attorneys is working to help the miners, who were not unionized, to secure back pay and other damages as part of bankruptcy proceedings. Sam Petsonk, a West Virginia attorney who is representing 1,100 of the laid-off employees, said the miners’ plight highlights the need to reform bankruptcy laws so employee wages and benefits are more highly prioritized in such legal proceedings.
Blackjewel is selling off mines as part of the bankruptcy proceedings and, in at least one case, “the buyer has committed to assume and pay outstanding employee obligations,” according to a statement from interim CEO David Beckman.
The previous chief executive, Jeffrey Hoops Sr., resigned on July 3.
“Blackjewel knows that each day that passes creates additional hardship for miners who have not yet been brought back to work and their families,” Beckman said. The company “continues to work tirelessly on finding ways to make all of the employees whole on their pre-petition wages.”
The protest has brought attention to the decline of labor unions across coal country, particularly in Harlan County, site of a violent uprising in the 1930s by coal miners who attempted to form a union. As mines shut down in recent decades, amid declining reserves and more stringent environmental regulations, they have been replaced with smaller, less labor-intensive operations that relied on nonunionized workers.
Now, there are no unionized coal mines in Kentucky, according to Phil Smith, the director of communications and government affairs for the United Mine Workers of America. Nationwide, just about a quarter of the nation’s 38,000 hourly coal miners are represented by the United Mine Workers, Smith added.
“These workers are showing how all workers are vulnerable to the efforts of corporations to deny them wages and benefits, but you can come together as a group and challenge it,” said William J. Londrigan, president of the Kentucky AFL-CIO.
[Rural Appalachia lags the rest of the country in infant mortality and life expectancy]
The fight has attracted national attention. Farmer Wayne Cryts drove 12 hours from Missouri to show support for the coal workers’ cause.
While visiting the camp last week, he told Sexton and Rowe that he made national headlines in the early 1980s when he nearly lost 31,000 bushels of soybeans after the company that stored it declared bankruptcy. With his crop tied up in court proceedings, Cryts and dozens of supporters tried to force their way into the grain elevator to retrieve his harvest. The move triggered a protracted legal battle that eventually landed Cryts in prison.
“I can tell you from experience, that coal is the only leverage you got,” said Cryts, who vowed to return if authorities try to forcibly break up the camp.
Meanwhile, all around them, storefronts are boarded up and signs advertising payday loans are affixed to power poles. Some Cumberland residents say their faith in the U.S. political system is being tested.
“It just feels like we are still waiting” for Trump’s vow to revive the economies of depressed communities, said Boe Montgomery, 59. “This town is just about done in, and they might as well just make it a lake.”
But Dan Mosley, the county executive, said the overall health of Harlan County’s economy had been on an upswing in recent years before the Blackjewel bankruptcy. The county had a 13 percent unemployment rate in January 2017, when Trump was sworn into office, but it had fallen to about 7 percent, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The unemployment rate surged back to 13 percent in July, according to the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
The closure of the Blackjewel mines shouldn’t be viewed as “an issue that affects the president in any way,” Mosley said.
“This is an issue of one failed company, and one failed executive who didn’t manage his company the right way,” said Mosley, a Democrat, who added the region also needs to continue diversifying its economy.
As he sat in the protest camp last week, holding his 9-month-old daughter, 29-year-old David Pratt said being laid off made him decide to go to college to get his nursing degree.
“I just started last Monday and decided to do it while I’m still young enough,” said Pratt, noting he’s now been laid off three times from three different coal companies over the past 11 years.
But many of the miners say they remain optimistic they will soon be able to return to work after Blackjewel’s Kentucky assets are sold off to a new owner.
If that happens, though, the miners believe their protest will have sent a powerful message to their new boss as well.
“Coal will make a comeback, maybe not a big comeback, but it will come back,” Rowe said. “And hopefully these companies will see guys are going to start standing up again.”"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "Daily Business Briefing
+
14
%
+
12
Inflation
+
10
+
8
+6.8% in
November
+
6
+4.9%
without food
and energy
+
4
+
2
0
Year-over-year change in the
Consumer Price Index
–
2
’70
’80
’90
’00
’10
’20
+
14
%
Inflation
+
12
+
10
+
8
+6.8% in
November
+
6
+4.9%
without food
and energy
+
4
+
2
0
Year-over-year change in the Consumer Price Index
–
2
’70
’75
’80
’85
’90
’95
’00
’05
’10
’15
’20
Inflation jumped to the highest level in nearly 40 years, fresh data released on Friday showed, as supply chain disruptions, rapid consumer demand and rising housing costs combined to fuel the strongest inflationary burst in a generation.
The rising costs spell trouble for officials at the Federal Reserve and the White House, who are trying to calibrate policy at a moment when the labor market has yet to completely heal from the pandemic, but the risk that price increases could become more lasting is increasing.
The Consumer Price Index climbed by 6.8 percent in the year through November, the data showed, the fastest pace since 1982. After stripping out food and fuel, which can move around a lot from month to month, inflation climbed by 4.9 percent.
Prices were up 0.8 percent from October, according to the report. That’s slightly slower than the prior monthly increase, but still an unusually rapid pace.
The question is what happens next. Fed officials have become increasingly concerned about rising price — both because the uptick has lasted longer than expected and because it shows signs of broadening to areas less affected by the pandemic.
Earlier this year, prices increases were concentrated in goods. Used cars and couches were in demand as the pandemic changed people’s lifestyles, but factories around the world struggled to keep up with the surge in buying, in part because shutdowns tied to the virus upended production. Shipping routes and ports also became clogged as demand followed an atypical pattern, with too many U.S.-bound goods trying to leave Asia in particular.
Those disruptions were expected to be temporary. Instead, they have lasted for months, as demand for goods remains strong and because the virus continues to upend production.
As pandemic quirks persist, inflationary pressures are also broadening. That includes rental prices, which have surged after an initial slackening during the pandemic and are helping to push up overall price gains. It’s a worrying development for the Fed as it considers its next policy steps.
“Generally, the higher prices we’re seeing are related to the supply-and-demand imbalances that can be traced directly back to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy, but it’s also the case that price increases have spread much more broadly in the recent few months,” Jerome H. Powell, the Fed chair, said during congressional testimony late last month. “I think the risk of higher inflation has increased.”
Fed officials are closely watching what happens with wages — and with consumer inflation expectations — as they try to gauge when and how much inflation will fade. But they are also starting to acknowledge that they might have to react to rising prices.
Mr. Powell signaled last week that the Fed, which began cutting back on economic support last month, will discuss speeding up that process at its Dec. 14-15 meeting. Economists expect central bankers to announce a plan to slow down their monthly bond purchases fast enough so that the program ends several months earlier, putting Fed officials in a position to raise their benchmark interest rate, their more traditional and more powerful tool.
Friday’s data will keep policymakers on track to accelerate their plans to taper off bond purchases, said Alan Detmeister, a senior economist at UBS and former chief of the wages and prices division at the Fed Board in Washington.
“This is still an enormous — a very, very strong — number,” Mr. Detmeister said, explaining that while he expects inflation to moderate, it may take until the middle of next year for that to show up clearly in the year-over-year data. “It seems pretty clear that they’re going to speed up the taper,” he added.
Moving to the next step — raising rates — would make debt of all kinds, from mortgages to car and business loans, more expensive. That would likely slow spending and hiring, cooling off demand and weighing down buoyant housing costs. The combination could help to put a lid on price gains.
But it could also leave the country with a less competitive labor market. That could be bad if the millions of people who remain out of the labor market compared to before the pandemic — many of them because of child-care issues and other virus-tied concerns — decide to embark on a job hunt.
Even so, the Fed is wary of letting inflation rocket out of control. In the 1960s, the central bank failed to take sufficiently decisive action to tamp down rising prices. Inflation leapt out of control, rising to double-digit levels during the 1970s, and Paul Volcker, then the Fed chair, pushed interest rates up sharply to get things under control in the early 1980s.
The hit to demand caused a painful recession before it brought price gains to heel. The mistake, and its aftermath, has haunted central bankers’s nightmares ever since.
As housing and other day-to-day costs rise, workers may begin to ask for raises to help offset the financial blow. Employers are competing for laborers at a time when job openings far exceed the number of people actively looking for jobs, and wages are rising at a brisk pace. The Employment Cost Index, a measure the Fed watches closely, picked up notably in the three-month period that ended in September.
Increased pay has not been enough to fully offset inflation for most people: Wage gains are up sharply, especially for low earners, but are not rising quickly enough to keep up with the acceleration in prices.
And as companies that face rising input and labor costs seek to pass those on to consumers, it may actually help to keep prices rising.
Big companies are managing to remain profitable as parts from overseas and commodities like gas climb in price, in part because they are successfully handing off those costs to consumers. Profit margins for nonfinancial companies have been increasing at a brisk pace this year, including in some of the industries hardest-hit by supply problems.
“Inventories of automobiles continued to shrink, but dealers saw strong profits because of high prices of vehicles,” the Federal Reserve’s Beige Book, a collection of regional economic reports, noted from the Richmond district.
A jump in inflation in November was partly fueled by rising prices for food and rent, which have increasingly posed a challenge for consumers and policymakers in Washington.
A Labor Department report released on Friday showed that inflation jumped to the highest level in nearly 40 years, climbing by 6.8 percent in the year through November. The big number included a strong increase in food prices, which rose 6.1 percent from a year earlier, according to the Consumer Price Index report. The 0.7 increase in November came on the heels of several months of strong gains: The food index climbed 0.9 percent in October and September.
Rent also rose 0.4 percent last month, reflecting a tight housing market that is feeding into inflation. The surge in rent costs has stemmed from strong demand for owned homes and as people have searched for extra space but found that houses were in short supply.
The rise in prices puts pressure on the Federal Reserve, which is discussing whether to end its bond-buying program faster. That would put it in a position to start to lift interest rates, which the central bank has held at near zero since the beginning of the pandemic.
Inflation has continued to surge as supply chain disruptions, strong demand for goods and rising wages have pushed prices higher, complicating President Biden’s agenda and depressing his approval ratings.
Americans have felt the increase in prices, which has dented their finances and forced them to cut back in other ways. Consumers have grown more wary of the jump in costs, expressing less optimism about their personal finances and the overall growth of the economy, according to a recent University of Michigan survey.
Alan Detmeister, a senior economist at UBS who used to be chief of the wages and prices division at the Fed Board in Washington, said that rents would continue to move up substantially in the near term. But real-time trackers like Apartment List have showed some softening in recent readings, which could be a good sign that those pressures will cool off toward the middle of 2022.
“While we’re probably going to be seeing some strong rents for the near term, those are probably going to be slowing,” Mr. Detmeister said.
Jayson Lusk, an agricultural economist at Purdue University, said that food prices had increased as people’s savings rose during the pandemic. That has given them the ability to pay more, making them more willing to accept price increases. Companies in the food industry have also increased wages to attract more workers, and have tried to pass along those costs.
Dirk Van de Put, the chief executive of Mondelez International, told CNBC last month that the company — which makes Oreo cookies, Ritz crackers and Sour Patch Kids candy — expected to increase prices by 7 percent next year. The company has faced higher costs for commodities, packaging and transportation, he said.
“It is very difficult to keep our clients well-stocked,” he said. “Our on shelf availability is nowhere near where we would like it to be.”
Although millions of people have seen their savings grow, that has started to dwindle for many working- and middle-class households. Higher food costs have a disproportionate impact on lower-income people, who tend to spend more of their income on food, Mr. Lusk said.
Diana Madoshi, a retired nurse in Placer County, Calif. who relies on Social Security benefits, said that higher prices at the grocery store had started to burden her budget. A carton of eggs, which used to cost about $2.80 before the pandemic, now can cost nearly $4, she said.
To offset the amount she is paying for food, Ms. Madoshi said she had been taking fewer Uber rides to her doctor appointments, instead having her friends drive her. She said she had also cut back the amount of clothes she had been buying during the pandemic.
“This is just another harsh reality of what we’re going through right now,” said Ms. Madoshi, 75. “And there’s nothing I can do about that.”
Inflation’s surge in the United States has been driven in part by a substantial increase in energy and prices over the last year, although there has been some moderation in recent weeks.
According to the Consumer Price Index, the 12-month change in energy prices as of November was 33.3 percent, nearly five times the overall inflation rate.
The cost for gasoline moved higher by 6.1 percent last month — a burden for households, particularly as the holiday travel season begins — and by 58.1 percent in the last year.
Prices for fuel oil — which is used for industrial and home heating — rose 3.5 percent last month, though that rate was far tamer than October’s 12.3 percent increase. If that easing continues, it may provide some measure of relief for households bracing for crippling household winter heating bills, but fuel oil is still up 59.3 percent on a yearly basis.
In better news, electricity prices were up a more modest 0.3 percent last month — a break from October’s 1.8 percent increase, but still 6.5 percent higherthan a year earlier.
Unlike in some other commodity sectors, increased energy prices in the market are quickly passed through to consumers, who have become accustomed to cheaper energy prices in recent years and now find themselves rankled by the sudden pressure put on their budgets.
“Households are facing higher prices at every turn,” said Greg McBride, the chief financial analyst at Bankrate, a personal finance company. The recent jumps in energy, food and shelter, he said, “are putting a major squeeze on household budgets.” Those three expenses account for more than half of the weighting in the Consumer Price Index. Energy alone accounts for 7.5 percent.
Because energy and food prices are notoriously volatile, the government reports separate inflation figures, including and excluding those categories. Including all categories, the one-month rise in November was 6.8 percent; without food and energy, it was 4.9 percent.
The surge in consumer prices is likely to intensify debates in Washington over the continuation of uncomfortably high inflation numbers — especially for core expenses such as energy that households can’t go without — and how policymakers can address them.
Republicans in Congress and lobbying groups for the oil and gas industry have filleted the Biden White House for higher energy prices; however, nonpartisan industry researchers have noted the overall weak relationship between a given administration’s level of support for renewable fuels and the arc of fossil fuel prices.
The George W. Bush administration, for instance, was noted for its connections to the oil and gas industry, yet during Mr. Bush’s second term, energy prices were often higher than today. And the Obama administration — whose clean-energy initiatives were prominent — benefited from a private-sector fracking boom on its watch, which increased supply and made gas and home heating relatively cheap for years.
Good news about energy prices has been uncommon for consumers lately. But recent moves in the market have indicated that the weather may cut them at least a temporary break. Natural gas, used to heat almost half of U.S. households, almost doubled in price earlier this fall, but sank by more than 10 percent at one point this week after the release of government weather forecasts projecting a warmer-than-expected winter.
Several states have had some of their warmest December days on record. And according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Climate Prediction Center, above-average temperatures throughout the South and most of the East could predominate for most of this winter.
“If it’s a warmer winter, then our estimates about consumption will be down, and if consumption is down, that’ll reduce the price of the fuel,” said Mark Wolfe, the executive director of the National Energy Assistance Directors’ Association, a group of state officials that provide assistance to households in need. “It’s a good sign.”
Much like retail businesses, energy producers have had to wrestle with imbalances in the economy caused by the pandemic shock and a halting reopening of activity.
An analysis this month from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas noted that oil-field activity in the region had risen steadily over the last month and a half, but that “supply-chain delays worsened, with significantly larger backlogs, escalating costs, and material and equipment lead times as long as 10 months for some types of machinery.”
The Labor Department’s announcement on Friday that the Consumer Price Index rose 0.8 percent in November and 6.8 percent from the year before is the latest sign of rapid price increases eroding President Biden’s approval ratings on the economy and threatening the expansive economic and climate legislation he is trying to push through Congress by the end of the year.
Voters and a crucial Democrat in the Senate, Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, have become increasingly concerned with the rising inflation that now ranks as America’s fastest annual price growth in four decades. A string of recent polls show inflation now ranks as the top economic concern nationwide, a product of rising costs for gasoline, food and a variety of goods that Americans have bought in droves as the country emerges from the pandemic recession.
Mr. Manchin is a centrist who looms as the most likely Democrat to vote against Mr. Biden’s $2.2 trillion legislation, which the president is trying to pass along party lines, given Republicans have no intention of voting for the bill. Mr. Biden will need every Democrat in the Senate to support the measure for it to pass. Mr. Manchin has in recent days repeated his fear that the spending in the bill, which includes initiatives to fight climate change and invest in children, parents and workers, could exacerbate price increases further — a claim that administration officials and Mr. Biden say is unfounded.
The president has attempted in recent weeks to balance his efforts to cast the recovery as strong — citing job gains, falling unemployment claims, nominal wage growth and the fastest economic growth since the mid-1980s — with acknowledgment that inflation has hurt American families’ wallets. And he has stressed the actions his administration has taken to unclog supply chains that are contributing to price increases.
In a statement on Friday, Mr. Biden said the data did not reflect more recent trends, which he said showed prices moving down for cars and gasoline, among others.
“Today’s numbers reflect the pressures that economies around the world are facing as we emerge from a global pandemic — prices are rising,” he said. “But developments in the weeks after these data were collected last month show that price and cost increase are slowing, although not as quickly as we’d like.”
“Even with this progress,” Mr. Biden added, “price increases continue to squeeze family budgets. We are making progress on pandemic-related challenges to our supply chain which make it more expensive to get goods on shelves, and I expect more progress on that in the weeks ahead.”
Mr. Biden’s aides have said throughout the year that the expect the current bout of inflation to fade quickly, as supply chain issues work themselves out and the world continues to emerge from the pandemic. Those predictions have frequently proven overly optimistic. But administration officials made another round of them this week ahead of the Labor Department release, saying they expected the drivers of inflation, like rising prices for used cars, to prove temporary and the rate of inflation to fall sharply in the first half of 2022.
Administration officials also say they already see signs that other main drivers of price increases, like gasoline, are cooling off. Energy prices were up 33 percent from a year ago in the November report, and gasoline prices were up 58 percent. But the cost of a gallon at the pump began to fall in recent weeks, and so has the cost of natural gas.
Republican lawmakers on Friday continued to point fingers at Mr. Biden for the rising costs and said Democrats would exacerbate inflation with their $2.2 trillion spending bill.
“Senate Democrats should suspend any consideration of Biden’s inflation-driving Build Back Better spending binge until the president can demonstrate he can get inflation under control,” Representative Kevin Brady, Republican of Texas and ranking member on the House Ways and Means Committee, said in a statement.
Stocks on Wall Street jumped on Friday, with the S&P 500 on track for its best week since February, after inflation report that showed consumer prices were rising fast but was nevertheless in line with economists expectations.
The S&P 500 rose 0.7 percent in early trading, while the Nasdaq composite gained 1 percent. The S&P 500 has been rebounding this week, as concerns about the Omicron variant of the coronavirus eased somewhat even as it continues to spread. The benchmark index is poised to close the week with a gain of more than 3 percent, within striking distance of a record.
The gains on Friday came despite a Labor Department report that showed the Consumer Price Index rose at the fastest pace in nearly 40 years, up by 6.8 percent last month compared with a year earlier. The inflation measure rose 0.8 percent from October, which is a slightly slower rate in month-to-month increases.
Officials at the Federal Reserve officials have been watching inflation data closely for the past several months, and signaled that the bank was ready to speed up its pullback on monetary policy stimulus that had helped support the economy since the pandemic started. The latest data adds to concerns that what was initially a burst of reopening-driven inflation could linger longer than policymakers first expected.
Jerome H. Powell, the Federal Reserve chair, has said he expects central bank officials to address slowing bond purchases faster when they meet next week. Officials announced plans to slow those purchases by $15 billion a month, which would have the program ending midway through 2022.
Ending those purchases would set the stage for interest rate increases, the Fed’s most powerful tool to cool down the economy.
An oil project off the coast of Scotland that had become a test of Britain’s environmental credentials was shelved by its main owner on Friday.
The decision to halt Cambo, as the oil field is known, is a huge win for environmental groups like Greenpeace, and a blow to the North Sea oil industry. It comes just over a week after Shell, which owns 30 percent of the project, pulled out of the investment.
“We are pausing the development while we evaluate next steps,” said Siccar Point Energy, a London-based company that is backed by private equity firms, including Blackstone, the financial management giant.
Siccar Point said it had planned to invest $2.6 billion in Cambo, and had already spent $190 million on the field since acquiring it in 2017. The firm said that developing Cambo, a potentially valuable source of oil and natural gas, would have created 1,000 jobs.
Environmental groups, on the other hand, said that starting new drilling projects was not compatible with Britain’s goals on tackling climate change and reaching net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. The British government has been considering whether to let Cambo go ahead.
Located northwest of Scotland’s Shetland Islands, Cambo became a target of protests, including at the recent United Nations climate summit in Glasgow. Scotland’s top politician, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon, has said she did not think it should be given a green light.
On Dec. 2, Shell said it would not go ahead with investment because the economic case was not strong enough.
Shell’s decision, which was also prompted by the potential for delays from protests and lawsuits, led Siccar Point to decide it could not “progress on the originally planned time scale,” the firm said.
The U.S. stock market has been on a run, with the S&P 500 up nearly 4 percent so far this week, and more than 25 percent for the year. Fears about the Omicron variant of the coronavirus quickly faded, with stocks regaining lost ground.
This makes some market watchers nervous, the DealBook newsletter reports, because of a metric that suggests that stock prices may be too high given the level of corporate earnings and rising inflation.
The S&P 500 now has a real earnings yield — the inflation-adjusted ratio of earnings per share to the stock price — approaching negative 3 percent, the lowest since 1947, Bank of America equity strategists led by Savita Subramanian wrote in a recent note to clients. Negative yields are rare and often precede a stock market slump, the analysts wrote.
A low earnings yield means that corporate profits are not keeping up with stock prices. And because real yields subtract inflation from the measure, a negative real earnings yield means that a company, based on its stock price, is not generating enough profits to keep up with rising prices. (Using October’s inflation number, Tesla’s real earnings yield is negative 5.2 percent.)
The last time the S&P 500 had a negative real earnings yield, the Bank of America analysts said, was in 2000, before the tech bubble burst. It also happened twice during the stagflation of the 1970s and ’80s. This year, the S&P 500’s real earnings yield turned negative months ago, but it really sank recently as inflation has marched higher.
Besides a bear market, there are two ways a negative earnings yield can turn positive:
First, inflation would have to drop significantly, which some economists think is possible.
Second, at a time when wages are rising and supply issues are interfering with plans, corporate profits could accelerate faster than expected.
After the initial shock of the pandemic, stocks have shrugged off negative news and set a series of records. But the more that analysts consider the numbers, the more they worry that the gravity-defying rise may not last much longer. (Stocks fell on Thursday.)
That said, “we live in a world where real negative rates are almost acceptable as a norm,” Ms. Subramanian noted.
The Securities and Exchange Commission’s chair, Gary Gensler, has made clear for months that he is worried about the risks faced by investors in special purpose acquisition companies, which over the past two years have become a hugely popular way to take businesses public.
In a speech on Thursday, he elaborated on one of the S.E.C.’s main focuses in reducing those risks — with measures that could shake up the industry, the DealBook newsletter reports.
Mr. Gensler noted that SPACs are allowed to pitch potential investors using forward-looking business data that isn’t allowed in initial public offerings. That loophole, he said, allows the financiers behind these funds to release rosy-looking numbers that mask the underlying health of the business they’re taking public. (The S.E.C. has been looking into disclosure issues in SPAC deals involving the likes of Nikola and Lucid.)
It now looks as if the S.E.C. may require SPACs to provide more complete disclosures about their deals, and to do so earlier: “It is essential that investors receive the information they need, when they need it, without misleading hype,” Mr. Gensler said.
He also suggested that the people behind SPACs, including their sponsors, financial advisers and accountants, should be held more accountable for their due diligence on the companies these funds acquire, much as underwriters of I.P.O.s are. “Make no mistake: When it comes to liability, SPACs do not provide a ‘free pass’ for gatekeepers,” he said in his speech.
The goal is to even out the playing field between SPACs and I.P.O.s. Deal makers have expected financial regulators to tighten the rules governing blank-check funds, amid an explosion in their popularity and the underperformance of many companies that have used them to go public, but Mr. Gensler’s comments shed further light on what that might look like.
Daimler’s car and truck divisions concluded an amicable divorce on Friday when shares in Daimler Truck began trading separately on the Frankfurt stock exchange.
The separation of Mercedes-Benz, the luxury carmaker, from Daimler Truck, which owns Freightliner in the United States, signaled the end of an era not only for Daimler but also the German economy.
The spinoff, announced in February, was the final chapter in a transition that began in the 1990s, when Daimler was a sprawling conglomerate that also made trains and passenger aircraft. Along with other industrial empires like Siemens, Daimler has been forced to jettison excess baggage to remain competitive.
For car and truck makers, the need to ditch unwieldy corporate structures has become even more urgent as they try to survive the shift to emission-free propulsion. One justification for the spinoff is that it will allow Daimler Truck’s managers to make decisions more quickly.
Daimler Truck is betting on hydrogen fuel cells for long-haul trucks, in contrast to competitors like Scania that favor batteries. It is not yet clear which technology will prevail.
A few decades ago, many German companies operated on the principle that bigger was better. That might have made sense when capital was harder to come by, said Martin Daum, the chief executive of Daimler Truck, because the more profitable parts of a conglomerate could generate cash for struggling units.
“We had globally very inefficient capital markets,” Mr. Daum said in an interview. “That supported the buildup of conglomerates.”
“Today, every business that has a compelling idea can raise money,” he said.
Whether Daimler Truck has compelling ideas will now be put to the test. The shares opened Friday at 28 euros (about $31.60) and rose as much as 8.5 percent, valuing the company at about $27 billion.
The new company is the largest truck maker in the United States by way of its Freightliner brand. Globally, Daimler Truck is also the largest maker of buses. Its other brands include Mercedes-Benz trucks and buses sold primarily in Europe and Fuso trucks sold in Asia.
Daimler Truck and Mercedes-Benz luxury cars will remain closely connected. Daimler, the parent company of Mercedes, will retain a 35 percent stake in Daimler Truck. The remaining shares will be distributed to Daimler shareholders.
BNP Paribas, Citigroup and Goldman Sachs are serving as listing agents for the spinoff."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "10
%
Unemployment rate
8
6
JAN.
4.1%
4
+2.9%
Wage growth
2
0
’08
’10
’12
’14
’16
’18
10
%
Unemployment rate
8
6
JAN.
4.1%
4
+2.9%
Wage growth
2
0
’08
’09
’10
’11
’12
’13
’14
’15
’16
’17
’18
Declining Unionization
20
%
U.S. union membership
16.8%
16
12
Total
8
6.5%
Private-sector employees
4
0
’83
’90
’00
’10
’17
$1,100
1,000
Union members
900
800
Nonunion
700
600
500
Average
weekly
earnings
400
In constant
dollars
300
200
100
0
’00
’10
’17
20
%
$1,100
1,000
U.S. union membership
Union members
900
16.8%
16
800
Nonunion
700
12
600
Average weekly
earnings
Total
500
8
In constant dollars
400
6.5%
300
Private-sector employees
4
200
100
0
0
’83
’90
’00
’10
’17
’00
’15
’10
’15
’17
20
%
$1,100
Union
members
1,000
U.S. union membership
900
16.8%
16
Nonunion
800
700
12
600
Total
Average weekly earnings
500
In constant dollars
8
400
6.5%
300
Private-sector employees
4
200
100
0
0
’83
’90
’00
’10
’17
’00
’10
’17
A collapse in the rate of union membership for private-sector employees — to 6.5 percent last year from the upper teens in the early 1980s — appears to have played a key role in holding down wages. This is partly because unions benefit workers directly: Average pay for workers represented by unions tends to be higher than for those who aren’t, even after controlling for education and other characteristics. But unions also benefit workers indirectly. In industries and regions where unions have a larger presence, pay tends to be higher for all low- and medium-wage workers, not just those represented by unions.
“If you work for a nonunion firm and your employer is worried about the possibility of a unionization drive, one way to dampen down that possibility is to pay workers at the union rate,” said Jake Rosenfeld, a sociologist at Washington University in St. Louis.
The effects are especially pronounced for men. A recent study by Mr. Rosenfeld and two colleagues estimated that wages for men employed in the private sector who are not union members would have been 5 percent higher on average — about $2,700 per year — by 2013 if unions had the same reach as in the late 1970s. (The figure excludes senior managers.) For men with only a high school diploma or less, that figure rose to nearly $3,200. NOAM SCHEIBER
Restraints on Competition
Contract restrictions, such as noncompete clauses and no-poaching agreements, that prevent workers from quitting their jobs for better ones have grown across the work force. Once reserved for highly paid, highly skilled employees like doctors and engineers, these contracts have filtered down the ladder to nurses, laborers and even retail clerks.
Virtually every study on the subject shows that these agreements reduce wages in an area, since many people get their largest raises when they leave their company or threaten to. Noncompete clauses also tend to prevent growing businesses from hiring as fast as they would like, and that can harm the overall economy by keeping talented employees from joining the higher-productivity companies that move business forward.
In many fields, a similar effect has been produced simply by the consolidation of local businesses, particularly outside major cities — areas where President Trump’s campaign tapped into economic frustrations. A recent study found that wages fell when fewer employers in a geographic area listed most of the open jobs in an occupation. CONOR DOUGHERTY
A Lagging Minimum Wage
Federal minimum wage
$12
an hour
Adj. for inflation
10
8
6
$7.25
4
2
Nominal
0
’40
’50
’60
’70
’80
’90
’00
’10
’18
States that have a higher minimum wage
$7.50
$9.00
$10.50
$12.50
Federal minimum wage
States that have a higher minimum wage
$12
an hour
$7.50
$9.00
$10.50
$12.50
Adj. for inflation
10
8
6
$7.25
4
2
Nominal
0
’40
’50
’60
’70
’80
’90
’00
’10
’18
Federal minimum wage
States that have a higher minimum wage
$12
an hour
1968 PEAK: $11.27
$7.50
$9.00
$10.50
$12.50
11
Vt.
$10.50
Wash.
$11.50
Me.
10
Mont.
Minn.
Adusted for inflation
9
Mass.
$11.00
N.Y.
8
S.D.
Mich.
7
N.J.
Ohio
Neb.
Nev.
$7.25
D.C.
$12.50
Ill.
6
W.Va.
Colo.
Mo.
5
Calif.
$11.00
4
Ariz.
$10.50
Ark.
N.M.
3
Nominal
2
1
Alaska
Fla.
0
Hawaii
’40
’50
’60
’70
’80
’90
’00
’10
’18
The federal minimum wage, currently $7.25 an hour, has not increased since 2009, and its purchasing power has never returned on a sustained basis to what it delivered in the 1960s and ’70s.
In response, some state and local governments have passed laws raising minimum wages to as high as $15 an hour, arguing it is the best way to ensure that low-wage workers who otherwise have little leverage are able to earn a living wage and share in the country’s economic growth. That movement has produced a backlash in Republican-controlled statehouses, where lawmakers have tried to pre-empt localities from enacting their own minimum wages.
Opponents maintain that raising the wage floor is a job killer and reduces the number of hours worked. Most of the recent research, however, shows that a moderate increase in the minimum wage has little or no effect on overall employment. Whatever negative effects there might be, some economists say, are offset by workers’ greater purchasing power and revved-up economic activity. PATRICIA COHEN
Globalization and Automation
Technology and globalization have both made it easier for businesses to find cheaper alternatives to paying their workers more money. American manufacturing jobs, once a mainstay of well-paying blue-collar work, started rapidly declining after 2000, as China rose as an exporting power.
At the Rexnord Corporation’s steel bearings plant in Indiana, for example, American employees used to earn an average of $25 an hour plus benefits. Last year, the company moved the entire factory and its operations to Monterrey, Mexico, where the pay would average less than $6 an hour. Rexnord said the move would save the company $30 million and enable its products to compete better with cheaper imported bearings. The savings and increased profits would benefit stockholders. The losers were Rexnord employees.
The same dynamic occurs when businesses see they can save money by replacing workers with technology that reduces costs in the long run. Manufacturers that kept operations in the United States or built new ones have increasingly relied more on automation and advanced technology than on people. Thus, domestic output has expanded significantly even as payrolls have fallen. PATRICIA COHEN
Sluggish Productivity
+5
%
U.S. productivity
+4
+3
+2
+1
0
’90
’00
’10
’17
–1
+5
%
U.S. productivity
+4
+3
+2
+1
0
’90
’95
’00
’05
’10
’15
’17
–1
One possible explanation for slow wage growth: Productivity growth has been just as anemic. Productivity — in its simplest form, how much value the average employee creates in an hour of work — rose about 2 percent per year from the 1970s through the first decade of this century. It has risen less than 1 percent per year since then.
Standard economic theory holds that over the long run, pay and productivity ought to rise together: As workers produce more per hour, companies can afford to pay them more. That doesn’t always happen in practice — pay has lagged behind productivity, at least by some measures, since the 1970s. Still, if productivity picks up, wages are likely to follow suit.
The trouble is, weak productivity growth is just as much of a mystery as weak wage growth. There are pessimistic explanations (recent technological advances are less economically significant than those of earlier eras) and optimistic ones (recent advances are significant, but we haven’t felt their full effects yet). But no one is really sure. BEN CASSELMAN
Outsourcing
Companies have increasingly outsourced work once handled by their employees. And wages for work performed by contractors tend to be lower, because they don’t benefit as much from companies’ internal pay scales and their norms relating to fairness.
Profitable businesses with generous pay scales tend to give low-skilled employees above-market wages. They appear to worry about the blow to morale and cohesion if they squeeze those workers while others share in the company’s prosperity. But once those jobs are pushed out of the company, wages fall to the market rate.
A 2010 study by the economists Arindrajit Dube and Ethan Kaplan found that janitors made 4 to 7 percent less, and security guards 8 to 24 percent less, when they were employed by a contractor rather than the company whose facilities they cleaned or protected.
While there are no precise estimates of the impact of this trend, evidence suggests that the effect is increasing. One estimate found that the portion of workers in so-called alternative arrangements, like working for a contractor, rose to nearly 16 percent in 2015 from about 10 percent in 2005. NOAM SCHEIBER
Or Maybe It’s Normal
+5
%
Wage growth is
slow based on
unemployment …
Wages
and
salaries
+4
Year-
over-year
change in
quarterly
figures
1995-2015
+3
2016-2017
+2
+1
LINEAR
TREND
4%
6%
8%
10%
Unemployment rate
+5
%
… but not based on
a broader measure
of non-employment
+4
+3
+2
+1
18%
20%
22%
24%
Prime-age non-employment rate
+5
%
Wage growth is
slow based on
unemployment …
… but not based on
a broader measure
of non-employment
+4
1995-2015
Wages
and
salaries
+3
2016-2017
Year-over-
year change
in quarterly
figures
+2
+1
LINEAR
TREND
4%
6%
8%
10%
18%
20%
22%
24%
26%
Unemployment rate
Prime-age non-employment rate
+5
%
Wage growth is slow
based on unemployment …
… but not based on a broader
measure of non-employment
+4
1995-2015
Wages
and
salaries
+3
2016-2017
Year-over-
year change
in quarterly
figures
+2
LINEAR
TREND
+1
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
10%
11%
17%
18%
19%
20%
21%
22%
23%
24%
25%
26%
Unemployment rate
Prime-age non-employment rate
With the nationwide unemployment rate at 4.1 percent, the lowest since 2000, economists have been surprised by the slow growth in workers’ paychecks. Historically, when that few people are unemployed, companies have had to pay more to attract workers — simple supply and demand.
But maybe competition for workers isn’t quite as intense as the unemployment rate suggests. The government’s official definition of unemployment is pretty narrow: it excludes anyone who isn’t actively looking for work. Adam Ozimek, an economist at Moody’s Analytics, has found that under a broader definition of unemployment — anyone in the prime working years who isn’t employed, for whatever reason — recent wage growth is in line with historical norms.
If Mr. Ozimek’s analysis is right, it suggests there is a sizable pool of people who aren’t officially counted as unemployed but who might be willing and able to work under the right circumstances. Some may be struggling with addiction or other illnesses, or may have been out of work so long that they’ve given up looking. Others may just not be willing to work for the wages offered.
As the economy improves, more may come off the sidelines. But as economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco recently argued, that could make overall wage growth look worse, because people entering the labor force usually earn relatively low salaries. The country’s aging population could also be a factor, because retiring baby boomers (who, on average, earn relatively high wages) are gradually being replaced by millennials (who generally earn less). BEN CASSELMAN"
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "Daily Business Briefing
Target plans to cut prices and cancel orders to clear out unwanted inventory, announcing a series of steps on Tuesday to combat inflation and supply chain disruptions. The actions would cut its profit in the current quarter, the company said, pushing its shares down.
It is the latest move by a major retailer revealing how inflation and shifts in consumer habits are swiftly changing the outlook for business. Just three weeks ago, Target shocked investors with earnings that were much worse than expected, leading its shares to fall nearly 25 percent. It cut its forecast for profit then, and lowered it even further on Tuesday.
Target, like many retailers that faced skyrocketing demand in the early months of the pandemic, stocked up on goods as snarled supply chains delayed shipments. But consumers are now turning away from goods like furniture, appliances and other products for staying home and shifting to spending more on experiences and going out.
Target’s ballooning inventory reflects a mix of merchandise that hasn’t — or can’t, for supply chain reasons — keep up with this shift. “Trends have changed rapidly since the beginning of the year,” the company said in its statement. It said it planned to add storage capacity near ports to hold more goods and open more distribution centers to “add flexibility and speed” in its supply chain.
“It’s certainly a surprise,” said Michael Baker, a managing director and senior retail analyst at D.A. Davidson. “Not only were they over-inventoried — a lot of their competitors were over-inventoried as well, and that’s what they misjudged,” he said. Because other big-box stores were now also trying to slash inventory, Target is “going to have to be aggressive with markdowns,” he added.
Even President Biden weighed in on Target’s travails, saying in a statement mostly about the trade deficit that “one of the nation’s largest retailers announced that it will take swift action to lower prices for certain goods,” playing up the potential effect that the company’s markdowns may have on reducing stubbornly high inflation. (He left unsaid the impact on Target’s profit margins.)
Target’s warning on Tuesday follows its disappointing earnings report last month, in which an unexpectedly large rise in inventory played a role. That came shortly after Walmart announced similarly downbeat earnings, dented by higher labor and fuel costs. Those reports helped spark a decline in the S&P 500 that dragged it down briefly into bear market territory, defined as a fall of 20 percent from a recent peak.
Stocks have recovered somewhat since then, and on Tuesday the markets appeared more resilient than they were when Target announced its earlier profit warning: After an initial wobble, the S&P 500 traded slightly up in early afternoon trading. Mr. Baker sensed a hint of optimism in investors’ reaction, with Target’s stock avoiding the nosedive it took before, and the broader market seemingly taking the news in stride.
There have also been some promising signs for retailers: Discounters and brands that serve higher-income shoppers have recently reported earnings that beat Wall Street’s expectations, suggesting that companies in the middle are most at risk of getting squeezed. Dollar Tree and Dollar General upgraded their forecasts for the year as shoppers sought lower prices and traded down from more expensive brands. At the same time, Nordstrom said that shoppers were updating their wardrobes with clothes for “long-awaited occasions” and Macy’s said that sales of luxury goods were strong.
For large and small nations around the globe, the hope of averting a recession is fading, the World Bank warned on Tuesday.
The grinding war in Ukraine, ongoing supply chain chokeholds, Covid-related lockdowns in China and dizzying rises in energy and food prices are battering economies all along the income ladder, saddling them with slower growth and surging inflation.
This suite of problems is “hammering growth,” David Malpass, president of the World Bank, said in a statement. “For many countries, recession will be hard to avoid.”
Global growth is expected to slow to 2.9 percent this year from 5.7 percent in 2021. The outlook, delivered in the bank’s latest Global Economic Prospects report, is not only grimmer than one produced six months ago, before war erupted in Ukraine, but also below the 3.6 percent forecast in April by the International Monetary Fund.
Growth is expected to remain muted in 2023. Growth for the 2020s is expected to fall below the average achieved in the previous decade, the report said.
Other than a handful of oil exporting nations like Saudi Arabia, which are benefiting from prices of more than $100 a barrel, there is a barely a spot on the globe that has not seen its prospects dim. Among the most advanced economies like the United States and Europe, growth is forecast to slow to 2.5 percent this year. China’s growth is projected to fall to 4.3 percent from 8.1 percent in 2021.
Russia’s economy is expected to contract by 8.9 percent — a hefty reduction, but still smaller than predictions by other forecasters.
Emerging nations will face the hardest setback, where the blows from the pandemic and the Ukraine war are still reverberating. The poorest nations will grow poorer.
Per capita income in developing economies will fall 5 percent below where it was headed before the pandemic hit, the report said. At the same time, government debt loads are increasing, a burden that will grow heavier as interest rates increase. Roughly 75 million more people will face extreme poverty than were expected before the pandemic.
In some ways, the economic threats mirror those faced in the 1970s, when spiraling oil shocks followed by rising interest rates caused a paralyzing stagflation, the bank said. That combination of events triggered a series of financial crises that rocked developing nations, resulting in what was known as a “lost decade” of growth.
The bank, which provides financial support to low- and middle-income nations, reiterated its familiar basket of remedies that include limiting government spending, using interest rates to dampen inflation and avoiding trade restrictions and subsidies. It also said that public spending should give priority to protecting the most vulnerable people.
That protection includes ensuring that low-income countries have sufficient supplies of Covid vaccines.
WASHINGTON — At her confirmation hearing in early 2021, Treasury Secretary Janet L. Yellen told lawmakers that it was time to “act big” on a pandemic relief package, playing down concerns about deficits at a time of perpetually low interest rates and warning that inaction could mean widespread economic “scarring.”
A year and a half later, prices are soaring and interest rates are marching higher. As a result, Ms. Yellen’s role in crafting and selling the $1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan, which Congress passed in March of last year, is being parsed amid an intensifying blame game to determine who is responsible for the highest rates of inflation in 40 years. After months of pinning rising prices on temporary supply chain problems that would dissipate, Ms. Yellen acknowledged last week that she had gotten it “wrong,” putting the Biden administration on the defensive and thrusting herself into the middle of a political storm.
“I think I was wrong then about the path that inflation would take,” Ms. Yellen said in an interview with CNN, adding that the economy had faced unanticipated “shocks” that increased food and energy prices.
Republican lawmakers, who have spent months blaming President Biden and Democrats for rising prices, gleefully seized upon the admission as evidence that the administration had mismanaged the economy and should not be trusted to remain in political control.
The Treasury Department has scrambled to clarify Ms. Yellen’s remarks, saying her acknowledgment that she misread inflation simply meant that she could not have foreseen developments such as the war in Ukraine, new variants of the coronavirus or lockdowns in China. After a book excerpt suggested Ms. Yellen favored a stimulus package smaller than the $1.9 trillion that Congress approved last year, the Treasury released a statement denying that she had urged more spending restraint.
At this tenuous moment in her tenure, Ms. Yellen faced tough questions on inflation when she testified before the Senate Finance Committee on Tuesday and is likely to confront similar queries on Wednesday, when she appears before House lawmakers. The hearings are ostensibly about the president’s budget request for the 2023 fiscal year, but Republicans are blaming Mr. Biden’s policies, including the $1.9 trillion stimulus package, for high prices for consumer products. Ms. Yellen’s comments have given them grist to cast his first term as a failure.
“How can Americans trust the Biden administration when the same people that were so wrong are still in charge?” said Tommy Pigott, rapid response director for the Republican National Committee.
The glare is particularly uncomfortable for Ms. Yellen, an economist and former chair of the Federal Reserve, who prides herself on giving straight answers and staying above the political fray.
Ms. Yellen said at the hearing on Tuesday that current levels of inflation were “unacceptable. She pointed to “disruptions caused by the pandemic’s effect on supply chains, and the effects of supply side disturbances to oil and food markets resulting from Russia’s war in Ukraine” as the primary reasons for high prices. She said Mr. Biden’s proposed clean energy initiatives and plans to reform the prescription drug market are measures that could lower costs for Americans.
In recent weeks, Ms. Yellen has had to defend the Biden administration’s economic policies even as fault lines have emerged within the economic team. She has expressed reservations about the lack of progress in rolling back some of the Trump administration’s China tariffs, which she views as taxes on consumers that were “not strategic,” and she has been reluctant to support student debt forgiveness proposals, which could further fuel inflation if people have more money to spend.
Over the weekend, Ms. Yellen came under fire again after an excerpt from a forthcoming biography of her indicated that she had sought unsuccessfully to pare down the pandemic aid bill because of inflation concerns. The Treasury Department released a rare Saturday statement from Ms. Yellen denying that she argued that the package was too big.
“I never urged adoption of a smaller American Rescue Plan package,” she said, insisting that the funds have helped the United States economy weather the pandemic and the fallout from Russia’s war in Ukraine.
Pressed by Senator Steve Daines, a Republican from Montana, about the extent to which the stimulus money fueled inflation, Ms. Yellen argued that countries around the world are all grappling with rising prices and yet they pursued different fiscal policies.
“It can’t be the case that the bulk of the inflation that we’re experiencing reflects the impact of the ARP,” Ms. Yellen said.
Ms. Yellen also pushed back against the idea that an expanded child tax credit that was included in the stimulus package had a significant impact on inflation. She acknowledged that it increased demand and might have led to a “marginal” increase in food prices, but said that was justified by the fact that more children had access to food.
“It cut childhood poverty dramatically,” Ms. Yellen said.
Ms. Yellen did appear to veer away from the view of some Democrats that corporate greed and profiteering was a primary reason for rising prices.
Asked by Senator Charles E. Grassley, an Iowa Republican, about whether greed was to blame, Ms. Yellen demurred.
“I guess I see the bulk of inflation as reflecting supply and demand factors,” Ms. Yellen said, sidestepping the issue of greed.
Throughout the last year, Ms. Yellen has largely been an ardent public defender of the Biden administration’s economic agenda. She has clashed publicly at times with critics such as Lawrence H. Summers, a former Treasury secretary, who warned that too much stimulus could overheat the economy.
For months, Ms. Yellen — and many other economists — talked about inflation as “transitory,” saying rising prices were the result of supply chain problems that would dissipate, and “base effects,” which were making the monthly numbers look worse in comparison with prices that were depressed during the early days of the pandemic.
By May of last year, Ms. Yellen appeared to acknowledge that the Biden administration’s spending proposals had the potential to overheat the economy. She noted at The Atlantic’s Future Economy Summit that the policies could spur growth and that the Fed might have to step in with “modest” interest rate increases if the economy revved up too much.
“It may be that interest rates will have to rise somewhat to make sure that our economy doesn’t overheat, even though the additional spending is relatively small relative to the size of the economy,” Ms. Yellen said.
But economic indicators still suggested that inflation remained under control through much of that spring. In an interview with The New York Times last June, Ms. Yellen said she believed that inflation expectations were in line with the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent target and that while wages were increasing, she did not see a “wage price spiral” on the horizon that could cause inflation to become entrenched.
“We don’t want a situation of prolonged excess demand in the economy that leads to wage and price pressures that build and become endemic,” she said, adding that she did not see that happening.
In the ensuing months, as prices kept rising, Ms. Yellen acknowledged that supply chain problems for items such as microchips — which are crucial for a variety of products, including cars — were worse than she had originally realized. She began to project that inflation could last well into this year.
“I am ready to retire the word transitory,” Ms. Yellen said at a December event sponsored by Reuters, noting that new virus variants had muddled the economic outlook. “I can agree that that hasn’t been an apt description of what we are dealing with.”
Jerome H. Powell, the Fed chair, had just days earlier signaled that the Fed would stop using that word to describe inflation, showing that Ms. Yellen was not out of line with other key economic policymakers.
Ms. Yellen reiterated on Tuesday that she and Mr. Powell “probably could have used a better word than transitory.”
Although some Republicans have called for Ms. Yellen’s resignation, Democrats outside and inside the Biden administration have in the last week come to her defense.
Mr. Summers said on CNN last week that Ms. Yellen had been echoing the views of most mainstream economists last year when she played down inflation and that those incorrect projections called for a rethinking of economic models.
“The consensus didn’t see the overheating risk,” Mr. Summers said. “I’ve been wrong plenty of times in my life, but I did see that there was very substantial demand pressure that was building and it seemed plausible given that that there would be bottlenecks.”
Brian Deese, the director of the White House National Economic Council, dismissed the suggestion that Ms. Yellen could be sidelined as the administration looks to shift how it communicates about the economy.
“Secretary Yellen is our chief spokesperson on the economy,” Mr. Deese told Fox News last week. “That will continue to be the case, as has been the case.”
On Tuesday, Ms. Yellen made the case that the United States economy was facing a potentially deep downturn when Mr. Biden took office and that a robust rescue package made sense at the time. Those funds, she argued, ensured that the economy remained strong.
“We have a the fastest recovery of any developed country,” Ms. Yellen said. “There’s no question that inflation is too hight and it has to be addressed, and we’re starting to do that from a position of strength.”
Oil prices have recently flirted with the highs reached shortly after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, with West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. benchmark crude, starting the week at around $120 per barrel, before falling back slightly. Still, the price of a barrel has risen about 8 percent over the past month, and more than 50 percent since the start of the year.
The national average price for a gallon of regular gasoline was $4.92 on Tuesday, setting another record, according to AAA. That’s about 30 cents higher than a week earlier and $1.87 above a year ago.
In hopes of reducing gas prices and securing oil supplies, President Biden is set to meet Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman in Saudi Arabia, The New York Times’s Clifford Krauss writes. When Mr. Biden does, he will be following in the footsteps of presidents like Jimmy Carter, who flew to Tehran in 1977 to exchange toasts with the shah of Iran on New Year’s Eve. Like the prince, the shah was an unelected monarch with a tarnished human rights record.
As Mr. Carter and other presidents learned, Mr. Biden has precious few tools to bring down costs at the pump. But “a president has to try,” said Bill Richardson, an energy secretary in the Clinton administration. “Unfortunately, there are only bad options. And any alternative options are probably worse than asking the Saudis to increase production.”
The European Union on Tuesday reached an agreement that will require all new smartphones, tablets and laptops to use a common charger by 2026.
The policy is an attempt to address the well-known consumer frustration of having a drawer full of chargers — some for Apple devices, others for portable speakers or hand-held gaming systems. It represented an unusual level of involvement by a government regulator in product design decisions.
Policymakers said the move would cut down on electronic waste. But the new law had been opposed by companies including Apple, which said that it would prevent new charging technologies from developing. Under the law, a European standards body would be in charge of considering future charger designs for all devices.
By 2024, all new mobile phones, tablets, digital cameras, hand-held video game devices, headphones, portable speakers, keyboards, mice, earbuds and other portable devices will need USB-C charging ports, the European Commission announced. By 2026, the law will apply to laptops.
Companies will also be required to sell devices without a charger to reduce the number of chargers in circulation. The European Commission, the executive body of the 27-nation bloc, said that discarded and unused chargers produced 11,000 tons of waste each year.
“A common charger is common sense for the many electronic devices on our daily lives,” Thierry Breton, the European commissioner who helped negotiate the deal, said in a statement.
Although a hot job market pushed up pay for low-wage workers, the average pay gap between those workers and the chief executives of their companies widened even more last year.
The median pay for workers at companies that tend to pay low wages last year was up 17 percent, to $24,000, a jump more than double the rate of inflation, according to a study out Tuesday from the Institute for Policy Studies, a left-leaning think tank. The report examined pay at companies including Lowe’s, Target, Best Buy and Amazon.
Still, those rising wages did not outpace those corporations’ chief executive pay gains, which rose 31 percent, to an average of $10.6 million.
“We do have to acknowledge there was some good news last year,” Sarah Anderson, the lead author of the “Executive Excess” study, told the DealBook newsletter. “But this could have been a time when companies used rising profits to level the pay playing field. Instead, we haven’t seen a very big shift in pay equity.”
The study underscores the tight labor market and inflationary pressure that companies have been facing over the past year. That pressure has benefited lower-wage workers for the first time in years. The institute’s study last year, which looked at a different set of companies, found that median pay for all workers fell 2 percent in 2020. This year’s study looked at the lowest-paying 300 firms in the Russell 3000, an index of publicly traded stocks that includes megafirms as well as midsize and smaller public companies, and found that at nearly 60 percent of them, pay rose faster last year for chief executives than for the average worker.
Chief executives did even better at companies where salaries did not keep pace with inflation. Median workers’ wages at about a third of the firms in the study did not keep pace with inflation. At those companies, the average chief executive pay was up 65 percent, or more than double the increase at all of the firms in the study.
Among the companies highlighted in the report was Best Buy, where median pay fell 2 percent last year to $29,999, while the company’s chief executive, Corie Barry, received a 30 percent pay increase, to $15.6 million. Best Buy said in a financial filing that its executive compensation was “focused on pay for performance” and that the company’s management had delivered “strong results in its most recent fiscal year.”
Wells Fargo is temporarily suspending a hiring policy that led some managers to conduct sham interviews of nonwhite and female candidates, following a report by The New York Times highlighting the practice, the bank’s chief executive, Charles W. Scharf, told employees in a letter on Monday.
Instituted in 2020, the bank’s “diverse slate” policy stipulated that at least half the candidates interviewed for open positions paying $100,000 or more in annual salary needed to be “diverse” — a catchall term for racial minorities, women and members of other disadvantaged groups.
Though a version of the policy had been in place for years, Wells Fargo’s leaders spelled it out in writing in mid-2020 as part of a broader push to increase diversity at the bank. On Monday, Mr. Scharf told employees that the policy would be put on hold for several weeks to give the bank’s leaders time to study its use and make changes.
The pause would allow the bank to gain confidence that “the guidelines live up to their promise,” and that “hiring managers, senior leaders and recruiters fully understand how the guidelines should work,” Mr. Scharf said in the letter.
The Times reported on May 19 that a former employee in the bank’s wealth management business had complained that he was being forced by his bosses to interview people for jobs that had already been promised to others, just to meet the “diverse slate” requirement.
The man, Joe Bruno, was one of a dozen current and former Wells Fargo employees who said they had witnessed or participated in fake interviews. Some of the employees said that sham interviews were also conducted for jobs that paid less than $100,000. The purpose was to record the fact that “diverse” candidates had been interviewed in case bank regulators checked whether Wells Fargo was giving minorities a fair shot at getting jobs, they said.
After The Times report was published, lawmakers, including Senator Sherrod Brown, Democrat of Ohio who heads the Senate Banking Committee, criticized the practice. Mr. Brown wrote to Mr. Scharf demanding that the bank fix its problems “once and for all.” Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, also a Democrat, cited the report in a May 20 tweet in which she called for the breakup of Wells Fargo.
Over and over, @Wellsfargo gets caught cheating. And this time they've been caught giving fake job interviews to candidates to "boost diversity efforts on paper" —even though they had already given the job to someone else. This bank needs to be broken up.https://t.co/kX6bbgvSw2— Elizabeth Warren (@SenWarren) May 20, 2022
Mr. Bruno was fired last August after he complained to his bosses. Bank officials said in messages to employees following the Times report that if fake interviews had happened at all, they represented isolated incidents that were not in keeping with the bank’s policy.
In his letter, Mr. Scharf said the bank had reasons to believe the “diverse slate” policy was working. In 2021, for example, 42 percent of people hired for jobs paying $100,000 or more were members of a racial or ethnic minority, an increase of five percentage points from two years earlier, before the “diverse slate” policy was in place.
But Mr. Scharf said in Monday’s letter that the members of the bank’s operating committee — which includes its most senior executives — had concluded that there was “opportunity to improve our implementation around some of our activities.”
Mr. Scharf said that the “diverse slate” policy would be suspended for several weeks to give leaders a chance to “review our guidelines and processes and to make improvements.” Once the review is completed, he added, Wells Fargo will “make adjustments to our diverse slate program where appropriate and relaunch it during the month of July.”
Today in the On Tech newsletter, Shira Ovide writes that Apple, Meta, Microsoft and Snap are steering toward a future in which we’ll wear computers on our heads for interactions that fuse physical and digital life.
But given technologists’ spotty record of predicting digital revolutions, it’s worth examining why their pronouncements haven’t come true yet — and if this time, they’re right."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "At the peak of the holiday season, retail added 41,000 jobs despite continued waves of store closures. Just in the past week, Pier 1 Imports said it would close up to 450 stores after a 13 percent drop in quarterly sales, and Macy’s said it would close 29 stores within weeks.
Average hourly earnings rose by a mere 0.1 percent in December, meaning over the past year, wage growth is at 2.9 percent.
Economists say wages are not growing as fast as they should be, especially for those who aren’t seeing a boost from state and local minimum wage increases. Many businesses are still pulling back on investment and say Trump’s truce with China does little to assuage their anxiety. Plus, Democratic leaders and presidential hopefuls caution that Trump’s economic and trade agenda could eventually stymie the growth.
Diane Swonk, chief economist for the accounting firm Grant Thornton, said the disappointing wage growth reflects “an economy where you can get a job, but it’s harder to get a raise.” Swonk said it’s possible wage growth figures for the start of 2020 could be ever harsher because wages for 2019 peaked in February.
Analysts were also concerned about transportation and warehousing, with transportation in particular affected by the economy’s manufacturing slowdown. But those numbers didn’t change all that much.
Average monthly jobs gains for all of last year were 176,000, compared to 223,000 in 2018. But Mark Hamrick, senior economic analyst for Bankrate, said the decrease shouldn’t come as a surprise and that December’s figures didn’t reveal “anything that rocked our world.”
“Expansions don’t last forever, and this one probably is getting a little long toothed, but it’s not on life support,” Hamrick said.
Analysts predicted around 150,000 new jobs for the month and forecast a steady unemployment rate of 3.5 percent. Those estimates were significantly less than the 256,000 jobs added in November, although those figures also accounted for thousands of General Motors workers who returned to the workforce after a lengthy strike.
The jobs figures come as President Trump touts the economy’s strength as one of his administration’s top achievements. In 2019, the unemployment rate in particular hit lows not seen 50 years. The Dow Jones industrial average has gained about 45 percent since Trump took office, and fears of a recession have largely faded. The Federal Reserve cut interest rates three times last year, helping to sustain an 11-year-old economic expansion. And last month, the United States and China reached a “phase one” trade deal that is set to be signed on Jan. 15."
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "That’s not easy when the safe investments that pension funds usually rely on are paying less than 1 percent, a consequence of low interest rates.
CalPERS, the nation’s largest public pension plan, fell short of its goal in the fiscal year that ended June 30. Now, along with embracing riskier investments like private equity, Bienvenue is gambling on making low rates work for him, by borrowing billions of dollars in hopes of juicing the pension plan’s returns.
“We have to take more risk in some places,” he said. “...Systemically low interest rates, the net effect makes the challenge more difficult.”
CalPERS’ shift is just one example of how an era of persistently low interest rates has rippled across the economy, altering incentives while benefiting some groups and hurting others.
Consumers have snapped up 0% percent auto loans and mortgages at sub-3 percent rates. That’s helped the economy by driving sales of new homes and automobiles.
Depressed rates also have fueled a rise in corporate and government debt, aggravated trends toward greater inequality and left a wounded economy more dependent upon fiscal support from lawmakers at a time when Congress is intensely polarized.
Rates have been stuck at ultra-low levels for most of the past 12 years because of chronically weak demand in the U.S., Europe and Japan. The recovery from the 2008 financial crisis was the most anemic since World War II and — despite President Trump’s claims to have produced the greatest economy in history — the U.S. economy grew at an average rate of just 2.5 percent from 2017 through the end of last year.
Aging populations, subpar productivity growth and a once-in-a-century global health scare led the Fed earlier this year to return its benchmark borrowing rate to near zero and to resume large-scale buying of corporate and government securities. Fed Chair Jerome Powell has said rates would remain near zero at least through 2023.
Once an emergency remedy for economic collapse, ultra-low rates now are a fixture of the U.S. landscape. It may be a decade, perhaps longer, before they return to the levels seen in the 1990′s and early 2000′s, economists said.
“Yes, this is a very striking environment compared to the preceding 150 to 200 years of the modern economy, with the possible exception of the Great Depression,” said Adam Posen, president of the Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Today’s low rates reflect a shift in the way the Federal Reserve thinks about the economy. After a review last year, top Fed officials concluded that the neutral interest rate — one that neither spurs economic activity nor cools rising prices — is lower than they had believed.
With rates expected to stay low, the Fed will have less ammunition to fight recessions. In March, when the coronavirus pandemic plunged the economy into a sudden freeze, the Fed could reduce its key lending rate by just 1.5 percentage points, far less than the roughly 5 point historical average, Lael Brainard, a Fed governor, noted in a recent speech.
The Fed’s limited firepower leaves Congress with more responsibility for propping up the economy. House Democrats and the Trump administration have been locked for weeks in fruitless talks over a new round of relief spending.
“The risk here is downward spiral,” Brainard said, warning that the economy could be trapped in a vicious cycle of low interest rates, muted inflation and weak growth.
Long-term trends such as disappointing productivity gains and limited labor force growth are sapping the economy’s potential. In July, the Congressional Budget Office said the U.S. economy could expand in the long-run at an average annual rate of just 1.8 percent — down from more than 4 percent in 2000.
“It’s like a case of sclerosis,” said Nathan Sheets, chief economist for PGIM Fixed Income. “It seems everything in the economic body is slowly down and is functioning at a somewhat more restrained rate than it did 15 years ago.”
By lowering its benchmark lending rate, the Fed has made it easier for companies to obtain credit for job-creating investments. Its purchases of treasury securities early in the crisis helped ease bottlenecks in the market for U.S. government debt.
But like a life-saving drug that carries dangerous side effects, the Fed’s low interest rate policy has complicated the job of managing the economy and raised risks to financial stability.
“There are real costs to keeping rates at zero for a prolonged period of time,” Robert Kaplan, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas said in a recent speech. “Keeping rates at zero can adversely impact savers, encourage excessive risk taking and create distortions in financial markets.”
In November, the Fed warned that a prolonged period of low interest rates could damage the profitability of banks and life insurers and force pension plans to take bigger risks. The result would be to increase “the vulnerability of the financial sector to subsequent shocks,” the Fed said.
“There are fundamental reasons we are where we are. But there are unintended consequences,” said Kathy Bostjancic, chief U.S. financial economist for Oxford Economics.
The banking industry is a good example of the relationship between economic weakness, low interest rates and financial stability.
Falling interest rates meant banks charged borrowers less for their loans. The spread between what banks earned by lending and what they paid depositors for their savings — the net interest margin — fell to its lowest mark since the government began keeping records in 1984, according to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
As a result, bank profits in the second quarter fell 70 percent from the previous three months. Bank stocks, measured by the KBW index, have recovered from the pandemic crash in March only half as much as the overall stock market.
Over the past two years, new deposits have far outpaced demand for loans, according to a Goldman Sachs analysis. That reflects both the Fed’s asset purchases, which have injected large amounts of cash into the financial system, and weak demand.
As banks parked much of that $3.2 trillion inflow in cash, which earned just one-tenth what they could make by lending the money to a good corporate credit risk, their profits have shrunk.
Banks have enough of a capital buffer to ride out a renewed economic downturn, the Fed said. But the risk is an economic relapse would cause large numbers of consumer and business loans to go bad, eroding industry reserves and causing banks to restrict new lending.
“Financial stability is a first-order concern for the Federal Reserve and, going forward, a first-order risk for the U.S. economy,” said Sheets, a former Treasury Department official.
The Fed’s cut in short-term interest rates does not directly lower public borrowing costs. But investors seeking guaranteed returns this year have been willing to finance the government’s nearly $3 trillion response to the economic spiral. On Tuesday, investors asked just 0.64 percent to lend the government money for 10 years, a 59-year low in public borrowing costs.
Before the financial crisis, the government paid 5 percent.
These low rates mean that as a share of the economy, interest on the federal debt costs taxpayers a bit less today than in 2008 — even though the public debt has grown to more than $20 trillion from less than $6 trillion over that period.
By depressing the returns on risk-free U.S. Treasury securities, low rates also have encouraged investors to buy stocks. Since December 16, 2008, when the Fed cut its benchmark lending rate to near zero for the first time, the Dow Jones Industrial Average, with dividends reinvested, has gained roughly 320 percent. That’s about five times what the iShares Core U.S. Aggregate Bond exchange-traded fund, a broad bond market proxy, returned over the same period.
The rise in stocks has benefited the already prosperous. The wealthiest 1 percent of Americans own more than $11 trillion of stocks and mutual fund shares, more than 70 times the total held by the poorest half of the country, according to the Federal Reserve.
The top 1% now owns 52 percent of the equity in the U.S. up from 42 percent when the Fed first dropped rates to zero. The bottom half of the country owns a slightly smaller share of all stocks than it did 12 years ago, according to Fed data. And small savers earn almost nothing from bank accounts or certificates of deposit.
Soaring stocks have led some analysts to warn of a financial bubble. Yet, the Fed really has no choice but to keep rates low. For all of its unintended consequences, easy credit represents the only escape from an era of disappointing growth.
“The policy has severe distributional consequences,” said Posen. “Small savers don’t do well. But these same small savers wouldn’t do well if central banks raised rates and more people were unemployed.”
Still, the low interest rate era is imperiling retirement security for millions of Americans, making it more expensive for public pensions to meet their promise of guaranteed income decades in the future. The problem is especially acute for funds like the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund, which continues to count on earning 8 percent annually. The fund declined an interview request.
The low rates era has pushed fund managers to shift more assets into “alternative investments,” riskier initiatives such as private equity, hedge funds and real estate. They promise higher returns than bonds, but carry larger risks as well.
At CalPERS, Bienvenue, who holds the chief investment officer title on an interim basis, is implementing a new strategy that aims for higher returns by using borrowed money and increasing investments in private equity deals, which could be harder to sell in a sudden downdraft than publicly-traded stocks.
The fund posted a 4.7 percent return for the fiscal year that ended June 30 and has averaged 6.3 percent over the past five years, short of what’s needed.
“Whether 7 is doable or not is an open question,” said Bienvenue. “Even with leverage and even with private assets, we acknowledge that’s a tall order.”"
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "General Motors said Monday it will close five factories and lay off nearly 15,000 workers in a move that shows the economy may be starting to slow and dents President Trump’s claim to be leading a renaissance for industrial America.
The automaker said it would save $6 billion annually by thinning its salaried management ranks, dropping thousands of American and Canadian factory workers, and emphasizing the production of larger sport-utility vehicles rather than sedans.
GM’s announcement sounded an incongruous note amid otherwise plentiful signs of U.S. economic health. The last six months have produced the economy’s best back-to-back quarters in four years. The unemployment rate is near a half-century low. And corporate profits are exceeding expectations.
[GM layoffs are another victory for capital over labor]
Yet the automaker’s overhaul is a reminder that the economic expansion, which began in June 2009, already is the second-longest since modern records began in 1854. Few economists anticipate a recession anytime soon, but the annualized rate of auto sales has fallen by 1 million vehicles since September 2017, and data on retail sales, industrial production and housing all suggest that the economy is tiring.
“We’d be very surprised to see output growth picking up further from here; all the manufacturing cyclical indicators we follow have peaked, and some are declining,” Ian Shepherdson, chief economist for Pantheon Macroeconomics, wrote in a recent research note.
The communities affected by GM’s decision are spread across the nation’s politically vital midsection.
Car plants in Oshawa, Ontario; Detroit-Hamtramck; and Lordstown, Ohio, will stop production of the Chevrolet Impala, Cruze and Volt, the Cadillac CT6, and the Buick LaCrosse next year. Transmission plants in White Marsh, Md., and Warren, Mich., also are halting operations, the company said.
Coming just weeks after Republican candidates lost several congressional seats across the industrial Midwest, GM’s action carries a stark political warning for the president. If voters conclude that Trump failed to deliver on his promise to return lost jobs and prosperity to the region, his reelection hopes could be dealt a blow.
In 2016, he won four states with significant ties to the auto industry: Wisconsin, Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania. They provided nearly a quarter of the 270 electoral votes needed for victory.
Before leaving the White House Monday for a campaign rally in Mississippi, the president told reporters he had complained to GM chief executive Mary Barra about the shutdowns.
“I was very tough,” the president said. “I spoke with her when I heard they were closing. And I said: ‘You know, this country has done a lot for General Motors. You better get back in there soon. That’s Ohio, and you better get back in there soon.’ ”
Trump said he was pressing the company to replace lost production in the factories it plans to shutter with other models, citing the Lordstown plant, which makes the Chevy Cruze.
“Their car is not selling well. So they’ll put something else — I have no doubt that, in a not-too-distant future, they’ll put something else. They better put something else in,” he said.
Trump’s ire may be linked to his repeated promises to reverse the Rust Belt jobs hemorrhage that he said had emptied the region’s factories as a result of poorly designed trade policies.
“They’re all coming back. They’re all coming back. Don’t move, don’t sell your house,” the president said during a July 2017 visit to Youngstown, Ohio. “We’re going to fill up those factories or rip them down and build new ones.”
During an October 2016 campaign rally in Warren, Mich., site of one of the targeted transmission plants, Trump promised: “If I’m elected, you won’t lose one plant, you’ll have plants coming into this country, you’re going to have jobs again, you won’t lose one plant, I promise you that.”
Ohio Sens. Rob Portman (R) and Sherrod Brown (D) slammed GM’s decision to shut down the Lordstown plant, with Brown labeling it “disgraceful” and blaming it on “corporate greed.”
GM’s bombshell news comes near the end of a year that has seen the auto industry occupy center stage in the Trump’s “America First” campaign to overhaul U.S. trade policy. Raw-material costs have soared as a result of Trump’s tariffs on imported steel and aluminum, with Ford saying it absorbed a $1 billion hit because of the president’s policies.
The new North American trade deal with Mexico and Canada includes sourcing requirements that will complicate industry supply chains, and the president also is considering imposing 25 percent tariffs on imported vehicles, a policy that would increase the cost of imported cars by an estimated $6,000 and eliminate 600,000 industry jobs, according to the American Automotive Policy Council.
Philip Levy, a White House economist in the George W. Bush administration, said the auto industry layoffs could prompt Trump to go ahead with additional trade barriers. “While he should take the GM move as a prompt to reconsider his approach, he seems much more inclined to double down reflexively,” Levy wrote in an email.
[The president may be shifting tactics in his trade fights]
In Lordstown, workers planned to pray for a miraculous reversal of the company’s decision, according to David Green, president of United Auto Workers Local 1112.
“It’s like someone knocks the wind out of you,” he said of GM’s announcement. “You lose your breath for a minute.”
About 40 percent of the local’s members voted for Trump, Green said. Now workers want to see the president keep his promises, he said.
“He came to our community and said: ‘Don’t sell your house. These jobs are coming back,’ ” Green said. “We’ve seen nothing but job losses around here.”
Indeed, even before Monday’s announcement, Lordstown was bleeding jobs. Since Trump took office, GM has eliminated two shifts and roughly 3,000 jobs at the plant, according to John Russo, a visiting scholar at Georgetown University’s Kalmanovitz Initiative for Labor and the Working Poor.
Despite a lengthy period of economic growth, the unemployment rate in the area is 5.2 percent, well above the national 3.7 percent mark.
“The costs are going to be devastating,” Russo said of the latest layoffs. “This thing is going to ripple through the economy.”
Investors’ reaction to the news underscored the Wall Street-Main Street divide that the populist president has vowed to erase. Even as thousands of American families faced a holiday season without cheer, GM shareholders saw an immediate 4.8 percent gain in the value of their shares.
To be sure, GM’s action was largely a result of shifting consumer demand rather than a sudden, economywide deterioration. “GM is making a big bet on a future that is autonomous, connected and electric,” said Michelle Krebs, an analyst at Auto Trader. “It has to be extremely profitable now to finance that because no one knows when those vehicles will be commonplace.”
Roughly 1 million of the nation’s 150 million non-farm workers are employed in motor vehicle manufacturing, according to economist Jim O’Sullivan of High-Frequency Economics. That’s about as many vehicle production jobs as 10 years ago, when the total U.S. workforce was smaller.
The overall economy is still in good shape. Small businesses remain upbeat, and payrolls are expected to continue growing, O’Sullivan said.
But the economy’s growth rate, which slowed in the third quarter to 3.5 percent from 4.2 percent in the previous three months, is widely expected to continue decelerating. The boost from last year’s tax cut and increased government spending is fading, while uncertainties and costs associated with the president’s tariffs are mounting.
“Even though times are good and unemployment is low, businesses have a pretty sober outlook about planning for the future,” economist Michael Feroli of JPMorgan Chase said. “There is a little bit of hesitancy to go all-in right now with investment.”
Danielle Paquette and Damian Paletta contributed to this report."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "Fiat Chrysler Makes $1.84 Billion Net Loss in First Quarter
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles NV reported a €1.7 billion ($1.84 billion) net loss for the first quarter, as lockdowns related to the new coronavirus pandemic have taken a toll on car sales and factory output globally.
Revenue fell nearly 16% to €20.5 billion compared with the first quarter of 2019. The company lost money in nearly every business unit with the exception of North America, where continued strength in pickup-truck sales led it to post an adjusted operating profit of €548 million for the January-March period.
Like other car companies, Fiat Chrysler has withdrawn its full-year guidance saying it is unable to provide more direction given the uncertainties surrounding the coronavirus pandemic.
Fiat Chrysler reported an adjusted loss of €0.30 earnings per share for the quarter, worse than analysts’ estimates of positive €0.05 earnings per share.
BNP Paribas Profit Drops as Structured-Products Business Takes Hit
BNP Paribas reported a drop in first-quarter net profit as France’s largest bank set aside new provisions to prepare for a flood of customers to default on their loans because of the coronavirus pandemic.
Like crosstown rival Société Générale, companies that canceled their dividend payments dealt a big hit to BNP Paribas’s equity derivatives unit. The move wiped €184 million ($200 million) from BNP Paribas’ structured products revenue this quarter.
Banks world-wide have been setting aside billions of dollars to cover bad loans and have been shoring up capital by canceling dividends and share buybacks.
The Paris-based lender, the biggest by assets in France, said net profit fell by 33% to €1.28 billion in the three months ended March 31.
U.S. Trade Deficit Likely Widened in March, Economists Say
Economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal expect the U.S. government to report that the country’s trade deficit widened in March as the coronavirus pandemic upended supply chains and slashed consumer spending.
The trade gap expanded by 11.2% in March to $44.4 billion, as exports fell more than imports, the economists estimated.
“We’ll see the beginning of what’s going to be a sustained fall in trade,” said Brad Setser, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations.
Several factors have depressed global trade. First, the emergence of the coronavirus in China caused factories there to shut down, disrupting supply chains world-wide. Then the virus spread globally, prompting many businesses to close operations, which caused job losses, and many governments to issue stay-at-home orders, which held down consumer spending. The lockdowns have likely produced a global recession, further reducing demand.
DuPont Swings to Loss, Posts Lower Sales
DuPont posted lower sales and swung to a loss for the first quarter as the Covid-19 pandemic led to higher demand for personal protective equipment but also disrupted supply chains.
The maker of nylon and other materials for the auto industry posted a net loss of $616 million, or 83 cents a share, compared with a profit of $521 million, or 69 cents a share, in the same quarter last year.
Sales grew in its electronics-and-imaging and nutrition-and-biosciences segments, but were offset by declines in the transportation-and-industrial, safety-and-construction and noncore segments.
DuPont said it increased the production of Tyvek garments by more than nine million a month, double the amount produced for any prior crisis.
Coronavirus Vaccine Enters Human Testing in U.S.
Researchers have begun injecting healthy volunteers in the U.S. with an experimental coronavirus vaccine developed by Pfizer and partner BioNTech, in the latest study exploring a potential defense against the disease.
Scientists at the New York University Grossman School of Medicine and the University of Maryland School of Medicine have begun giving people the first of four vaccine candidates. The trial will help evaluate whether they are safe, which produces the strongest immune response and what the dose should be. Pfizer plans to advance the candidate that proves most promising.
Results from the 360-person study could come as early as June, but the vaccine would still need to undergo testing in more patients, said Kathrin Jansen, Pfizer’s head of vaccine research and development."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "Coronavirus: US gives 10 times the amount of money to WHO than China
Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.
As coronavirus continues to cripple almost every country on earth, questions are being raised over the relationship between the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and the top brass at the World Health Organization (WHO).
Earlier this week, President Donald Trump accused the specialized United Nations Agency of acting too slowly on the escalating pathogen, and deemed it "very China-centric."
He affirmed in both a tweet and later at a press briewofing on Tuesday that his administration is "going to look into" the money U.S. taxpayers give to WHO – and potentially freeze it – given that Americans are the largest donors.
CLICK HERE FOR COMPLETE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE
WHO LEADER TEDROS ASKED TO EXPLAIN CHINA TIES BY GOP MEMBERS OF HOUSE OVERSIGHT PANEL
So exactly how much is China forking out to have attained such an apparent influence? Well, nowhere near the United States.
"In short, the total contributions of China versus the US is $86 million versus $893 million," David Maxwell, a senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies (FDD), told Fox News. "The U.S. contributes nearly ten times the amount China does."
Here is how it works.
WHO operates on a two-year budget, and invoices members with two annual payments. It receives its money – usually totaling around $4.5 billion per year – through two streams. The first is referred to as "assessed" contributions, which is considered core funding from its member states, and are based upon expected amounts scaled by population and income. These make up just under 20 percent of the total budget. The second stream is "voluntary", provided by member states, private individuals and organizations, and makes up the bulk of WHO's revenue.
"Nations are assessed membership fees based on their gross domestic product and population size," Dennis Santiago, a global risk and financial analyst surmised. "Nations and foundations can also make additional voluntary contributions to the general fund and for special designated projects, including outbreak and crisis response."
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION UNDER THE MICROSCOPE: WHAT WENT WRONG WITH CORONAVIRUS?
The United States pays the highest assessment fee to the WHO. The March 2020 WHO financials indicates that the United States' current year assessment is $57,883,460. This is almost twice China's 2020 assessment of $28,719,905 to the organization's annual budget, the second-largest assessment in WHO's budget.
Based on WHO financial reports as of March 2020, China committed to an assessment of $28,719,905 to the organization's annual budget. The current year amount is presently outstanding. China appears to be up to date in its payments; there are no amounts in arrears from prior years on WHO's report.
The same financials sheet indicates that the United States 2020 assessment is $57,883,460 USD, roughly double that of China's. The U.S. also has prior owed balances of $41,284,915 that have not been remitted. The total amount outstanding for the U.S. is $99,168,375; around one-half of the total $257,470,000 WHO is awaiting as of the end of March 2020. The U.S. and China have the two most substantial contribution assessments to WHO in 2020, followed by Japan and Germany.
WHO DIRECTOR FACES CALLS FOR RESIGNATION OVER HANDLING OF CORONAVIRUS, CHINA
According to WHO financials, China Assessments have been as follows.
2016 $23,914,320
2017 $23,914,320
2018 $18,948,900
2019 $18,948,900
2020 $28,719,905
2021 $28,719,905
"The history of assessments by WHO for the PRC shows the numbers did dip in the 2018-2019 period but have since grown to for the 2020-2021 period," Santiago explained. "Curiously, the WHO is supposed to make assessments to member nations based on their GDP and population size. China and the United States have similar GDPs, and China's population is four times larger than the U.S. But China's annual assessments are one-half that of America's."
He also pointed out that the U.S. also has a balance of an additional $41,284,915 from prior years that have not been remitted, for an outstanding U.S. total funding assessment of $99,168,375.
"But it is in voluntary contributions to WHO where the United States truly shines," Santiago pointed out. "In 2017, the latest year for which WHO has compiled reports, the United States government donated a whopping $401,108,929 USD, 40% of the total donations by member states that year. China's donations were a much smaller $10,584,499 USD in 2017."
Indeed, more than 80 percent of WHO's budget is made up not from assessed contributions but from voluntary ones – of which the United States again contributes the most, and China gives none, and the US gives the most.
WHO CHIEF'S QUESTIONABLE PAST COMES INTO FOCUS FOLLOWING CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE
In 2017 – the most recent data for voluntary contributions available – shows that the U.S. totaled more than $400 million of additional support above the almost $30 million already given per year under assessed contributions. Moreover, WHO data shows that the U.S. is its largest financier – giving more money than the United Nations itself – followed by South Korea, Australia, the Gates Foundation, and then Japan. The rest of the top ten is rounded out by donations from GAVI Alliance, National Philanthropic Trust, United Kingdom, New Zealand, Bloomberg, and the European Commission.
An examination of WHO'S voluntary contributions donor list from the period 2012-2013 showed that 20 entities made up 81 percent of all contributions. At the top, this time was the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, seconded by the United States, and then the United Kingdom and Ireland, the Gavi Alliance, Canada, Australia, Norway, and the UN Central Emergency Response Fund.
China was nowhere to be found in the top 20.
"The coronavirus crisis has exposed the CCP's strategy to infiltrate and dominate international institutions for two main reasons: to ensure they act favorably toward the PRC and to prevent admittance of Taiwan to any international organizations," Maxwell said. "At the very basic level, it is about ensuring these organizations accept and adhere to the 'One China' concept."
In total, the total comparisons have been tabulated here:
China Contributions 2019:
Assessed: $75,790,000
Voluntary: $10,189,000
Total: $85,979,000
US Contributions 2019:
Assessed: $236,912,000
Voluntary: $656,092,000
Total: $890,004,000
DO COUNTRIES WITH HIGH RATES OF MALARIA HAVE FEWER CORONAVIRUS DEATHS?
Brett Schaefer, senior research fellow in international regulatory affairs at the Heritage Foundation, further highlighted that nearly 90 percent of China's contributions were assessed (mandatory).
By contrast, 73 percent of US contributions were voluntary.
"China's contributions have been rising over the years because its economy and per capita income levels have been rising, and the formula for assigning assessed contributions is based on that data. However, despite its growing economy, China still only gives roughly a tenth of the amount that the US provided because the US is far more generous in providing voluntary contributions."
From Schaefer's lens, China's political clout is based partially on its growing financial contribution and the perception that it is a rising power, but also on its historical diplomatic relationships with developing countries.
"China's contribution is growing, and WHO bureaucracy does not want to alienate a government that may one day be its largest contributor," he observed. "Similarly, some governments are leery of angering China who they see as a future superpower. Finally, as with most international organizations, the biggest decisions in the WHO are made by the member states, including choosing the Director-General. Each member state has one vote, so China's influence with developing countries carries great weight through sheer numbers."
"What you really see when examining the financials of organizations like WHO is how generous the United States is to humanitarian causes. America's government and philanthropy dominate the equation constantly," Santiago added. "In all honestly, humanity would be in the Dark Ages were it not for the largess of America and its people.""
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "China is powering through an epic wave of coronavirus infections, setting the stage for a rebound in consumer and business activity that could prevent the global economy from tumbling into recession.

In recent days, Wall Street analysts at firms such as Goldman Sachs and Capital Economics have upgraded their forecasts of Chinese growth, citing signs that the coronavirus outbreak is peaking sooner than expected.

The pace of China’s reopening, after the lifting of its draconian zero-covid policy last month, will shape the global outlook for growth and inflation. Stock prices for U.S. companies that serve the Chinese market, such as the casino operator Wynn Resorts, would benefit from a smooth rebound, as would American attractions that appeal to Chinese tourists.

Since early December, when the Chinese government abandoned its zealous lockdown strategy, the coronavirus has sickened tens of millions of people and overwhelmed hospitals. In Henan province, with more people than Germany, nearly 9 in 10 residents are sick, officials said last week.

A critical test looms this month, when workers in coastal factories head back to their rural villages to celebrate the Lunar New Year, potentially igniting a second round of infections in areas where the medical system is less developed.

Despite the dangers, there are signs that the economy is stirring. Subway ridership in major cities is rapidly returning to normal. Consumers who accumulated savings while shut in their homes for much of the past year have money to spend. And the government is rolling out policies to support a rebound.

China’s ability to recover from nearly three years of self-imposed isolation “is very likely the single most important factor for global growth in 2023,” Kristalina Georgieva, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, told reporters last week. “It matters tremendously.”

Indeed, the global economy’s other main engines are far from firing on all cylinders. The U.S. economy, despite a strong end to 2022, will struggle this year as higher interest rates bite, according to the World Bank’s latest forecast. Europe is in recession, and Japan is projected to eke out just a 1 percent growth rate.

As for China, the World Bank forecasts growth of 4.4 percent this year, and some private estimates are even higher. Goldman predicts a 5.2 percent gain. “Evidence of a rapid China reopening is accumulating,” the investment bank said in a recent note to clients.

Still, it will take time for the Chinese to reestablish their pre-pandemic routines, including links to the outside world that the government severed in hopes of keeping the virus at bay. The next few months may bring a stop-and-go recovery before a more widespread resumption of activity in the spring, analysts said.

Even with a smooth Chinese reopening, the global economy faces a year of anemic growth, according to World Bank and IMF projections.

“It does provide a big impetus. But we’re not expecting China to have this huge growth surge and ride to the rest of the world’s rescue,” said Ben May, the director of global macro research for Oxford Economics in London.

Chinese policymakers are doing what they can to help. With domestic inflation low, the People’s Bank of China — unlike central banks elsewhere — cut rates last year and may cut them again. The government also has resumed lending to some major property developers, abandoning for now its efforts to trim the industry’s overall debt.

Signs of China’s awakening already are evident. After being largely confined to their homeland for the past three years by onerous quarantine and testing requirements, Chinese tourists are hitting the road.

Nearby destinations such as Thailand and Hong Kong are the immediate beneficiaries. But American tourist attractions also are anticipating the return of the Chinese.

“The booking inquiries are going through the roof. In the first days after the policy changed, there was a thousandfold increase on search engines in China,” said Adam Burke, the president of the tourism and convention board in Los Angeles, one of the most popular destinations for Chinese tourists.

Two Chinese airlines — Air China and Hainan Airlines — plan to resume daily nonstop service between Beijing and Los Angeles this month, he added.

Almost 1 million Chinese visitors are expected in the United States this year, up from 359,000 last year, according to the U.S. Travel Association.

That’s an impressive increase. But the total is still just a fraction of the more than 3 million who arrived annually in the pre-pandemic years. And the industry does not expect a recovery to that level until 2026, according to Geoff Freeman, the association’s president. Visa approvals and required coronavirus testing also will keep international travel from rebounding as quickly as domestic journeys.

Before the pandemic, China trailed only Britain and Japan as a source of international visitors for the United States. But the typical Chinese tourist stays 14 days — compared with the 10-day average — and spends freely. In 2019, China was worth more than $33 billion to U.S. airlines, hotels, entertainment venues and universities.

“Chinese travelers are absolutely critical to the travel economy in the United States,” Freeman said.

How quickly Chinese consumers return to their customary spending habits will determine the economy’s trajectory. Consumer confidence in China last year plunged to an all-time low amid the reimposition of lockdowns during the rise of the coronavirus’s omicron variant.

But household bank balances are up 42 percent, or $4.8 trillion, since the start of 2020, according to Andy Rothman, an investment strategist at Matthews Asia in San Francisco. That suggests Chinese consumers could unleash an amount exceeding Britain’s entire economy as they resume spending.

Some analysts worry that a resurgent China will consume more oil, driving up global prices, making inflation worse, and forcing the Federal Reserve and other central banks to keep raising interest rates.

Bank of America expects a barrel of Brent crude, the global benchmark, to reach $110 in the third quarter this year, up from around $80 today.

But even as Chinese oil demand increases, China is expected to resume exporting up to 1.5 million barrels per day of refined products, such as diesel fuel, which should take some pressure off retail prices, according to Citigroup. China had halted those exports in late 2021 to address domestic supply concerns.

Much of the increase in consumer spending also will be on domestic restaurant meals, movies, sporting events and other in-person activities that have been off-limits during the lockdowns, rather than on products from other countries. U.S. brands such as Starbucks and Yum Brands, the owner of Kentucky Fried Chicken, could benefit.

Luxury retailers also expect a boost from higher Chinese sales, within China and elsewhere. The stock of Louis Vuitton’s owner, LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton, has gained almost 13 percent since Beijing scrapped its coronavirus restrictions Dec. 7.

Still, China is emerging from a period of troubling weakness. Last year’s 3.2 percent annual growth rate was the lowest in decades, excluding the pandemic year of 2020. Repeated lockdowns demoralized the population and put a chokehold on consumers, small businesses and factories.

An unprecedented flurry of anti-government protests occurred in Beijing and other cities late in the year.

“2022 was a really dismal year,” said Mary Lovely, an economist with the Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Factories slumped in December for the third consecutive month, according to the official purchasing manager’s index from the National Bureau of Statistics. Youth unemployment sits at a record 19.9 percent. And an overbuilt property sector drowning in debt acts as a drag on investment.

China’s longer-term outlook is even more challenging. The nation’s working-age population is shrinking. And the property sector, which makes up 15 percent of the economy, remains vulnerable to a price decline that could ignite broader financial problems, according to BNP Paribas.

Although China’s economic growth this year is expected to outpace that of the United States, Europe and Japan, its performance will fall short of its contribution to the global recovery from the 2008 financial crisis. Thanks to massive government spending on an infrastructure program, the Chinese economy grew in 2010 by more than 10 percent, roughly twice the pace that is considered likely this year.

“There will be a positive spillover from China. But it’s not going to be as intense as in past Chinese recoveries,” said Nathan Sheets, the global chief economist at Citigroup.

China's population dropped last year for the first time since 1961. The historic turn marked the start of a looming demographic and economic crisis. (Video: Reuters)"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "The halting Chinese recovery offers sobering lessons for U.S. policymakers about what is shaping up to be a more protracted economic convalescence than the White House wants, according to business executives and economists.
“A V-shaped recovery seems to be really difficult to envision,” said James Green, senior adviser at McLarty Associates and a former U.S. diplomat in Beijing. “The lesson of the Chinese experience is: It’s going to be slow going.”
In late January, as the coronavirus began galloping across China, the government in Beijing imposed an unprecedented lockdown on the 60 million people in central Hubei province. The quarantine, later broadened to other areas, eventually succeeded in curtailing the spread of the illness. But it sent China’s economy, the world’s second-largest, into a tailspin with investment declining in the first two months by nearly one-quarter.
The United States waited to act, as the president played down the seriousness of the virus and insisted his administration had it under control. Only in March did many governors impose stay-at-home orders on almost all Americans.
Sign up for our Coronavirus Updates newsletter to track the outbreak. All stories linked in the newsletter are free to access.
China began reopening parts of its economy in mid-February. As the pandemic nears its peak in the U.S., Trump administration officials are racing to do the same.
Larry Kudlow, the director of the National Economic Council, said the economy could be reopened “in the next four to eight weeks” and would perform like “a dynamo” when it was.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin told Fox Business he anticipated “a very strong rebound later this year.”
But China’s two steps forward, one step back performance shows no recovery can gain steam before the pandemic is brought under control and measures to prevent a future outbreak — including widespread public health monitoring — are implemented. Even if those conditions are met, the collapse of many businesses and enduring changes in consumer behavior are likely to reshape the economy, altering investment, spending and saving patterns.
“The U.S. economy is going to rebound, once some of the restrictions are lifted. But it’s going to take a long time to get back to where it was,” said economist Mark Williams of Capital Economics in London. “When you fall a really long way, you can bounce. But I wouldn’t expect the U.S. to be back on the path it was on for at least another year or two.”
Before the coronavirus reached the United States in late January, the Federal Reserve projected the economy would expand by 2 percent in 2020 with unemployment ending the year at a half-century low of 3.5 percent.
Instead, U.S. output over the next two years will be $3.3 trillion less than what was anticipated and the jobless rate will touch a post-World War Two record 15 percent, economists at Goldman Sachs said Monday. In a sign of how long the return to normalcy will likely take, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office projects the unemployment rate at the end of 2021 will be 9 percent.
The president and his team are more upbeat. In his daily White House briefings, Trump has repeatedly predicted the economy will perform “like a rocket ship” once the virus is corralled.
“I think we're going to have a tremendous rebound. There’s a great energy and a great pent-up demand,” he said April 1, adding that before the pandemic, the U.S. had “the best economy in the history of the world.”
Most economists expect the mandatory shutdown now affecting most Americans to cause a historic decline in second-quarter output. Goldman Sachs, for example, expects the economy to shrink at an annual rate of 34 percent by the end of June. Even with a sharp rebound in the third quarter, only a bit more than half of the fall in output will be made up by year’s end, the bank said.
“This will be a slow recovery overall as many workers will be displaced and businesses adapt to a period of lost revenue,” Bank of America economists wrote in a recent client note.
Roughly 10 million workers lost their jobs in the last two weeks of March, and several million more are expected to join the jobless ranks this week. The soaring unemployment rate will cut into consumer spending once the economy reopens, and high debt levels may force many companies to trim their investment plans. On Tuesday, Exxon Mobil said it would reduce capital spending by 30 percent or $10 billion.
The president is eager to prove the doomsayers wrong. After initially floating the idea of lifting social restrictions in time for worshipers to attend Easter masses this weekend, Trump bowed to public health advice and embraced social distancing.
But speaking Sunday at the White House, he again betrayed impatience with the economic toll of the anti-pandemic campaign.
“We want to get our people back to work. Everybody wants to be back. We want to open up our country as soon as possible,” the president told reporters.
Trump may establish a task force to consider how the economy should be brought back to life, which could evaluate proposals for a rolling reopening based on geographic or demographic characteristics.
Recent comments by his top aides reflect the president’s frustration.
“We can get a pretty good snapback, a good snapback. That’s my hope … The sooner we begin to reopen, the faster that snapback’s going to be,” Kudlow told reporters Monday.
China’s experience, thus far, offers a cautionary tale.
As the Chinese emerged from quarantine, factories reopened more quickly than restaurants and retail outlets. Any business that relies on person-to person contact is suffering, as consumers remain nervous about catching the sometimes fatal respiratory illness.
“People are back at work. But they’re not shopping. They’re not going to restaurants. They’re avoiding public places,” Williams said.
Large state-owned factories have returned to work more quickly than the small and medium-sized businesses that are the backbone of both the Chinese and U.S. economies. Like the Trump administration, which has rolled out a new $349 billion loan program, Chinese officials sought to help small businesses stay alive. Beijing suspended social security and medical fees that are automatically deducted from companies’ accounts and leaned on landlords to defer rent payments, said Andy Rothman, an investment strategist with Matthews Asia.
“The recovery is well underway and seems to be picking up steam,” he said.
Investors have been cheered by signs of returning strength in the world’s second-largest economy. The official purchasing managers index rose in March to 52 from February’s record-low of 35.7. In key manufacturing provinces such as Guangdong and Zhejiang, officials report 100 percent of large enterprises have resumed operations, according to Trivium, a Beijing-based consultancy.
Yet roughly nine weeks after the authorities began urging people to return to work, many Chinese factories are just treading water. They are open for business, but lack orders. Major exporters are especially troubled since their U.S. and European customers have been idled by the pandemic.
Lingering Chinese weakness is evident in a Capital Economics index that blends measures of power station activity, property sales, subway ridership and long distance travel. In mid-February, as the government began pushing people to resume work, the index stood at 22 percent of the year-ago level. By mid-March, it reached 52 percent, but today it is only 59 percent.
It may be July 1 before operations are back to normal, according to the German Chamber of Commerce in China. The Chinese economy this year will grow less than 3 percent, its weakest performance since 1976, S&P Global Ratings said Tuesday.
“The shape of China’s recovery is still unclear. The government is trying to architect a fast and bold recovery, but as factories ramp back up, they are finding demand for their products outside of China has dissipated,” said James McGregor, chairman of APCO Worldwide’s greater China business.
Port activity is almost back to precrisis levels in Shanghai, though it remains just 40 percent of normal in Wuhan, according to data from HawkEye 360, a Herndon company that tracks radio frequency transmissions from cargo vessels.
Public health policies remain an unavoidable economic impediment. James Zimmerman, an attorney with Perkins Coie in Beijing, recently had to dispatch an associate attorney for a mandatory court appearance in Hangzhou. But when she returned to Beijing after that one-day trip, she faced a mandatory 14-day self-quarantine.
“Things are not quite back to normal,” Zimmerman wrote in an email. “Isolation and quarantine are still very much a part of daily life in China.”
China’s return to work requires health safeguards that are beyond what is customarily found in U.S. workplaces. Chinese workers routinely wear masks and accept routine temperature checks before being allowed into office buildings or factories.
“That’s probably what we’ll have to go through,” said Craig Allen, president of the U.S.-China Business Council. “Even after we bend or flatten the curve, we’ll have to keep in place -- probably longer than we’d like -- a system of monitoring and very strict application of public health rules.”
Whenever Americans resume their precrisis routines, they will inhabit a different economy than the one that existed just a few weeks ago.
Some businesses will have expired, unable to survive an indefinite revenue drought. Consumers may opt to save more and spend less. Governments will likely stockpile more medical supplies and install fever scanners in public buildings and transit hubs, said Torsten Slok, chief economist for Deutsche Bank Securities.
But the chief lesson from the Chinese experience is one that Americans may resist: Patience is the key to regaining prosperity.
“The Chinese economy took a huge hit. The government focused first and foremost on restraining the outbreak,” said Scott Kennedy, senior adviser at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. “They have gradually turned on the taps. It’s just going to take some time.”"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "Stock Rally, Real-Estate Rebound Boost Market for Second Houses

April 2, 2014 11:09 pm ET

Sales of vacation homes are surging again, the result of rising wealth in higher-income households and renewed confidence in the housing market.

The number of second homes acquired for part-time personal use jumped 30% last year to 717,000 homes, according to an annual survey by the National Association of Realtors. The gain was the largest since the association started tracking second-home sales in 2003.

Although the number of second homes sold last year is well short of the high point of nearly 1.1 million in 2006, last year's jump signals a rapidly changing sentiment about the value of residential real estate, which just a few years ago was considered a poor investment amid the broad market bust.

Economists note that the vacation-home market was a beneficiary of last year's big gains in the stock market and rising home values, bringing buyers more wealth and confidence. The Standard & Poor's 500 index of stocks posted a 30% increase last year, its largest since 1997. The median price of an existing home rose by 11.5%, the largest gain since 2005, according to the Realtors group.

That combination gives rise to the classic "wealth effect" in which people feel more wealthy and therefore more willing to spend. More households also sought to diversify their wealth by transferring their gains from stocks and other investments into real estate.

Rising prices and favorable currency-exchange rates spurred Calgary residents Sherry and Phillip Hickey to buy a second home in Mesa, Ariz., last year to escape the Canadian winters. The couple, represented by Realtor Kris Anderson at Your Premier Team at RE/Max Excalibur, spent $357,500 on a three-bedroom, three-bathroom home where they intend to spend roughly five months a year.

"We just saw that things were looking better in the Phoenix market and prices were going up," Ms. Hickey said. "We wanted to get in before they went up too high and to make use of the Canadian dollar at par" with the U.S. dollar at the time.

Ms. Hickey, 56 years old, and her husband, 63, who own a small business in concrete forming, spent several decades of savings on the purchase.

"The housing market is in full-blown recovery mode," said Joseph LaVorgna, chief U.S. economist for Deutsche Bank Securities. "People are much more confident in the sector as a long-term investment [as shown by] their decision to purchase an extraordinarily discretionary item, a second home."

Overall, vacation homes accounted for 13% of U.S. home sales last year, up from 11% in 2012, according to the Realtor association survey. Their median price last year was $168,700, up 12.5% from 2012.

Regionally, the South accounted for most vacation home sales last year—41%—likely due to its mild weather. Next was the West, with 28%; the Northeast, with 18%; and the Midwest, with 14%. Florida tends to propel the South to the forefront of the vacation-home market.

"The market definitely picked up for vacation homes in the Tampa Bay area overall last year," said Tony Baroni, who leads five real-estate agents at Keller Williams Realty in the Tampa Bay, Fla., area. "Our market had gone down so much [in price] that, even when it started recovering, buyers still felt like it was a great value."

The second-home surge also underscores a disparity in the market. More-affluent, move-up buyers trading into their second- or third-generation home have carried the U.S. real-estate market in recent years as would-be first-time buyers have been hobbled by strict mortgage-qualification standards.

Also, several measures show that household wealth reached new heights last year. Pay gains have favored better earners; U.S. Census Bureau data show that the top 60% of U.S. earners saw household income rise by 2.3% or more in 2012 while the bottom 40% saw gains of less than 1.8%.

Deutsche Bank's Mr. LaVorgna pointed to the U.S. ratio of household liquid assets to liabilities, meaning a comparison of readily sellable assets such as cash and stock against debt such as mortgages. In last year's fourth quarter, household liquid assets were 2.6 times liabilities, the highest ratio since 2000, he said. The latest ratio well exceeds the long-term average of 2.1 times since 1980.

Even so, "from a macroeconomic perspective, it's a positive thing," said David Berson, chief economist for Nationwide Insurance. "While the benefits of second homes may accrue disproportionately to the upper half of the income distribution, there are a lot of people who build these homes" and benefit from ancillary spending tied to them.

Meanwhile, the Realtor association's survey, which covered 2,008 households, also found that second-home purchases by investors declined last year by 8.5% to an estimated 1.1 million. Such a drop has been widely forecast as home prices rise and the number of foreclosed and distressed properties declines. The survey doesn't include purchases by large, institutional investors.

Write to Kris Hudson at kris.hudson@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
econ_change of article is: better
###
article: "The advance of wealthy households, while middle- and lower-income Americans struggle, is reshaping markets for everything from housing to clothing to beer.

Updated Jan. 28, 2015 10:36 pm ET

WOODINVILLE, Wash.—Five years ago, Quadrant Homes churned out starter houses in the Seattle area with an average sales price of $269,000 and the marketing slogan, “More House, Less Money.”

But facing a debt-burdened middle class and rising land prices, Quadrant has since exchanged entry-level buyers for customers free of credit worries and ready to splurge. Its new slogan, “Built Your Way,” accompanies homes with vaulted ceilings and gourmet kitchens that last year sold for an average price of $420,000. “We used a lot of market research to tell us that our old model wasn’t going to work,” said Ken Krivanec, Quadrant’s chief executive.

* Carlson’s Vulgar Messages About Colleagues Helped Seal His FateApril 26, 2023, * First Republic Bank Shares Sink More Than 40% After Earnings ReportApril 25, 2023, * Google Is All About Cost Control NowApril 25, 2023,

* Carlson’s Vulgar Messages About Colleagues Helped Seal His FateApril 26, 2023, * First Republic Bank Shares Sink More Than 40% After Earnings ReportApril 25, 2023, * Google Is All About Cost Control NowApril 25, 2023, * Microsoft Revenue Growth Stays Low as Economic Concerns Hurt DemandApril 25, 2023, * Biden Announces 2024 Re-Election Bid, Setting Up Potential Trump RematchApril 25, 2023, * Senators to Introduce Bill Mandating Code of Ethics for Supreme CourtApril 26, 2023, * McDonald’s, PepsiCo, GM Flex Their Pricing PowerApril 25, 2023, * IKEA Redesigns Its Bestsellers, Starting With the Billy BookcaseApril 25, 2023, * TikTok Ban in Montana Faces Speed Bump as Governor Seeks ChangesApril 25, 2023,

The emergence of a two-tiered U.S. economy, with wealthy households advancing while middle- and lower-income Americans struggle, is reshaping markets for everything from housing to clothing to groceries to beer.

“It’s a tale of two economies,” said Glenn Kelman, chief executive of Redfin, a real-estate brokerage in Seattle that operates in 25 states. “There is a high-end market that is absolutely booming. And then there’s everyone in the middle class. They don’t have much hope of wage growth.”

The recession blew holes in the balance sheets of all U.S. households and ended a decadeslong loosening of credit for middle-class borrowers. Now, credit is tight, and incomes have been flat or falling for all but the top 10th of U.S. income earners between 2010 and 2013, according to the Federal Reserve.

American spending patterns after the recession underscore why many U.S. businesses are reorienting to serve higher-income households, said Barry Cynamon, of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Since 2009, average per household spending among the top 5% of U.S. income earners—adjusting for inflation—climbed 12% through 2012, the most recent data available. Over the same period, spending by all others fell 1% per household, according to Mr. Cynamon, a visiting scholar at the bank’s Center for Household Financial Stability, and Steven Fazzari of Washington University in St. Louis, who published their research findings last year.

The spending rebound following the recession “appears to be largely driven by the consumption at the top,” Mr. Cynamon said. He and Mr. Fazzari found the wealthiest 5% of U.S. households accounted for around 30% of consumer spending in 2012, up from 23% in 1992.

Indeed, such midtier retailers as J.C. Penney, Sears and Target have slumped. “The consumer has not bounced back with the confidence we were all looking for,” Macy’s chief executive Terry Lundgren told investors last fall.

In luxury retail, meanwhile: “Our customers are confident, feel good about the economy in general and their personal balance sheets specifically,” said Karen Katz, chief executive of Neiman Marcus Group Ltd., last month. Reported 2014 revenues of $4.8 billion for the company are up from $3.6 billion in 2009.

Revenue for such luxury hotel chains as St. Regis and Ritz-Carlton rose 35% last year compared with 2008, according to market research firm STR Inc. Revenues at midscale chains such as Best Western and Ramada were down 1%.

On grocery aisles, the recession and its aftermath boosted sales of economy brands. At the high end, Whole Foods Market Inc. reported record sales per gross square foot last year.

“Demand bifurcated,” said Jason Green, chief executive of the Cambridge Group, a growth strategy firm that is part of Nielsen NV. “The familiar stuff my middle-class family had in the pantry, those are under significant pressure.”

In the grocery market’s middle tier, Safeway Inc., the second-largest supermarket chain in the U.S. was purchased last year by the private-equity group that owns Albertsons, the fifth-largest grocery retailer. Company officials said the deal would allow the companies to reduce costs—and lower prices for customers—as they fend off competition from low-price outlets and high-end stores.

In the cold case, sales of premium lagers are up 16% since 2007 after adjusting for inflation, while sales of economy brands grew 8%, according to research firm Euromonitor International. Sales of midprice beers are down 1%.

The trend hit auto makers some years ago, when BMW AG’s former chief executive Helmut Panke described the U.S. market as an hourglass: lots of demand for budget and luxury brands but little in between.

Steve Bates, general manager of BMW Seattle for the past 12 years, said new-car sales at his dealership were up 25% last year, while used-car sales were flat. The M4 series, a sporty coupe priced from $64,000, has been “selling out as soon as it touches the ground,” he said.

Then there are consumers like Vicki Oliver, 68 years old, of Temecula, Calif. She bought a used Hyundai Sonata last year to replace a wrecked 1995 Ford Explorer. Ms. Oliver and her husband, a real-estate agent, added onto their home two years ago so her daughter and son-in-law, a general contractor, could move in with their family.

“That was a way to make things work in hard times,” Ms. Oliver said. Caribbean cruises and trips to Florida are now memories. “We haven’t done that for years,” she said.

The housing market illustrates how weakness among middle-class consumers holds back the U.S. economy. Homes are generally the biggest purchase Americans make. Housing dollars ripple through the economy by triggering spending on appliances, furniture and landscaping.

For the first time, U.S. builders last year sold slightly more homes priced above $400,000 than those below $200,000. As a result, the median price of new homes exceeded $280,000, a record in nominal terms and 2% shy of the 2006 inflation-adjusted peak.

Total sales last year, however, were up just 1% compared with 2013, and more than 50% below their average from 2000 to 2002, before the housing bubble.

New homes are also getting bigger. The median U.S. home was more than 2,400 square feet in the third quarter of 2014, a 20% increase from early 2000 and a 10% increase from the peak of the housing market in 2006.

In Seattle, the median new-home size topped 2,500 square feet last year, a record, according to research firm Metrostudy Inc. Since the market hit bottom in 2011, sales of new homes priced above $600,000 have tripled, while sales below $400,000 are down 16%, according to CoreLogic DataQuick.

Builders boost profits selling more expensive homes. But less construction overall means fewer new jobs and reduced total spending.

“Over the long haul, I worry that you can’t run our housing market, which depends on volume, on affluent buyers alone,” said Diane Swonk, chief economist at Mesirow Financial in Chicago.

Young households have been slow to buy homes because of the tough job market. Many would-be buyers can’t save enough for a down payment or don’t earn enough to qualify for a mortgage. Student debt holds others back.

A typical household, for example, would need around $60,000 in cash to make a 20% down payment on the median-priced new home in the U.S. To qualify for a mortgage, they would need good credit and to show an annual income of about $45,000, assuming little other household debt. A government-insured loan in this example could call for an $11,000 down payment but would require an annual income of $60,000.

Lisa and Nathan Trione are looking for a house in Denver big enough for their five children. But there is little in their price range: $250,000 and under.

“You’re already intimidated by the process,” said Ms. Trione, a 28-year-old paralegal and office manager. “And then you see this huge price, and you say, ‘I’m not ready to do that right now.’”

Ms. Trione is paying off debt she incurred while earning her associate degree. She also is trying to raise her credit score, which, she said, fell during a series of early financial missteps.

Well-heeled customers, meanwhile, have their pick of mortgages. At the same time, some banks have pulled back from federally insured loans that allow for smaller down payments.

“We would like to build a smaller, higher-quality and less-volatile business,” Marianne Lake, chief financial officer at J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., told investors last year.

With fewer potential customers, builders have largely abandoned the entry-level market. “If a builder can make money on something, he’ll build it. The problem is that they can’t make money at the entry level,” said John Burns, of Irvine, Calif., a consultant to builders.

But rentals, the low-end of the housing market, are booming. Apartment construction has neared its fastest pace since 1989. Two of the nation’s largest home builders, Toll Brothers Inc. and Lennar Corp., have both launched multifamily construction divisions, each with around 5,000 units in the pipeline.

“We all wished we had a big apartment portfolio through this downturn,” said Douglas Yearley, Toll’s chief executive, during an earnings call last year.

With sales plunging in 2009, Quadrant called in a research firm that concluded more buyers might materialize if the company built more expensive homes. “When it’s data driven, the courage to make a remarkable change is easier than when you’re using your gut,” said Mr. Krivanec, the company’s chief executive.

Quadrant, a unit of TRI Pointe Homes Inc., was finishing seven homes per workday in 2004. They now finish less than two of the more expensive houses a day. But the share of buyers who back out of a deal, typically because they can’t get a loan, is down 10% since 2010.

To serve more higher-end buyers, Quadrant opened a design studio two years ago that lets buyers choose from dozens of cabinets, countertops, tiles and flooring. Some new buyers spend nearly twice as much on such upgrades, the company said, which adds to the profitability of home sales.

Common design features now include a walk-in closet and bathroom nearly as big as the master bedroom. Kitchens have a walk-in pantry.

On a recent Tuesday afternoon on Little Bear Creek Place, a cul-de-sac in this Seattle suburb, electricians, landscapers and framers worked on some 23 Quadrant home sites.

Nearby, Nick and Adriana Stoll unpacked boxes in their new four-bedroom home. The home is twice the size of the 1,200-square-foot, one-bedroom apartment they rented in nearby Bellevue.

The Stolls customized almost every feature and finish, including hinges on kitchen cabinets that prevent the doors from slamming shut. “I’m typically the kind of consumer where I make a quick decision,” Mr. Stoll said. “But when it comes to your home, well, we stared at 100 countertops for an hour.”

The Stolls survived the recession and have prospered. Mr. Stoll purchased a Seattle condominium in 2008, the day before learning he was losing his job at Washington Mutual, the thrift sold to J.P. Morgan after it was seized by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.

Mr. Stoll changed jobs twice before he was recruited in 2011 to work at a technology company. He broke even on the sale of his condo last year. “Other people encountered problems where maybe it’s student loans or credit cards or car payments,” he said, “and we have none of that.”

The couple put 20% down on their new home, which cost $579,000. Ms. Stoll works as a client associate for a large financial services company.

Growth in new home sales this year will depend, in part, on whether builders revive their interest in first-time buyers.

Two years ago, D.R. Horton Inc., the nation’s largest home builder, launched Emerald Homes, a luxury division. Last year, the company rolled out Express Homes, a division that pioneered no-frills housing for the entry-level market.

Mr. Krivanec, Quadrant’s CEO, said he doesn’t see a return to his company’s former model. There are enough people with good-paying jobs in the area—at Boeing, Amazon and Microsoft—to keep sales going, even it means building fewer homes. “We like where we’re at,” he said.

Write to Nick Timiraos at nick.timiraos@wsj.com and Kris Hudson at kris.hudson@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "SYDNEY — One Saturday in March, in the suburbs north of Sydney, around three dozen people gathered on a lawn outside a smallish two-bedroom apartment.
They were taking part in an idiosyncrasy of the Australian economic system. Here, selling a home tends to be an almost festive gathering, in which potential buyers show up for an auction and neighbors stop by to watch the spectacle — and quietly calibrate how much their own homes might be worth.
On this muggy day, almost all of the assembled crowd turned out to be gawkers; only four people actually raised their bidding paddles at any point. After bidding opened at 750,000 Australian dollars (about $532,000 in the U.S.), the action started slowly. Twice, it seemed to be petering out as the auctioneer, Andrew Robinson, nearly banged his final gavel, only to be extended with one more bid. Finally a young couple whose agent lobbed in a 930,000 Australian dollar ($661,000) offer won the day.
It reflected a wheezing Australian housing market. Prices have fallen since the country’s banks tightened lending standards in mid-2018 and the Chinese government made it harder for its citizens to buy property abroad. Not too long ago, the number of interested parties might have been double.
“Twelve to 18 months ago, it would have sold for 1.1 million,” said Mr. Robinson, with Belle Property, as he packed up his gavel and papers and prepared to head to his next auction on a day he would conduct eight of them. “There was more of a frenzied atmosphere, more people bidding who just didn’t want to lose out.”
I had flown 16,000 miles not to study economic malaise, but its opposite: the remarkable resilience of the Australian economy, which has gone nearly 28 years without a recession. The government, with elections to take place next month, recently announced an expected surplus in the next budget year.
Surely this grand economic success story would hold lessons for the United States and the rest of the world, right?
Yet instead of giddy enthusiasm, what I found in Sydney was a pervasive sense of caution and wariness — and not just involving real estate, though housing does loom large in discussions about the economy. In conversations with Australian businesspeople and college students, economists and government officials, I detected no sense of triumphalism.
An entire generation of young adults has grown up without experiencing a protracted downturn. But in Australia, as I came to learn, nobody really acts as if they’re the stars of an unprecedented three-decade success story. They’re aware that the good times could end. The mood is more practicality than pessimism.
America is on the verge of its own economic milestone: The current expansion is on track to reach its 10th birthday this summer, which would also put it on record as the nation’s longest streak without a recession.
During the decade I’ve spent chronicling that growth as an economics writer, a persistent whisper has been: How long can it go? The run has been uneven, underwhelming and repeatedly on the verge of unraveling, including scary moments in 2010, 2015 and this past December. Seemingly every commentator without a good cliché blocker has referred to it as “long in the tooth.”
Even the language of economics suggests that an end to the good times is inevitable. If you’re going to call it the “business cycle,” things can’t just keep getting better forever. Some of history’s great economic thinkers have theorized that downturns are as essential to the workings of the economy as the seasons are to agriculture.
Is Australia a unique case, a beneficiary of some good economic luck that cannot be replicated in the rest of the world? Or is the nation onto something, and are there lessons in economic policy that are applicable everywhere?
When I landed there in mid-March, in the waning days of the Australian summer, that’s what I hoped to figure out.
Good luck and good policy
Ask Australian economists about this golden run, and almost all will say it has been driven partly by good luck and partly by good policy.
The luck part can’t be minimized. Beneath the ground of large stretches of Australia are the iron ore and coal that have been the raw materials behind China’s long economic boom. Above ground lies the wheat and cattle that have helped feed China’s rapidly growing middle-class population.
China’s growth, in other words, has created a tailwind that has boosted Australia’s economy for much of this period. And if the Chinese economy ever truly tanks, even the most skilled policymakers in Australian will have a hard time preventing a recession.
But China’s gravitational pull can explain only so much. For one thing, other countries nearby have had recessions, some severe, in recent decades. And there are a long list of policy choices that enabled the long Australian boom even as otherwise similar economies sank.
One episode is particularly telling. In 1997, an East Asian financial crisis walloped the economies of countries like South Korea, Thailand and Indonesia. These nations were major buyers of Australian exports. The value of the Australian dollar started to fall on global currency markets, putting the expansion at risk only six years in.
On the other side of the Tasman Sea, New Zealand’s central bank responded to the same problem by raising interest rates. After all, a falling New Zealand dollar indicated a lack of confidence in the currency and implied that inflation would soon rise.
At the Reserve Bank of Australia, by contrast, officials concluded that the falling value of the Australian dollar reflected shifting economic fundamentals that were ultimately healthy — part of how the Australian economy could adapt to faltering demand from East Asia.
Rather than raise interest rates to try to prevent a falling currency, they viewed a falling currency as the key to navigating the peril — by making Australian exports more competitive in the United States and Europe, for example.
“The government was uncomfortable if the exchange rate went too low, because it looked like a sign of no confidence,” said Malcolm Edey, who was the central bank’s head of economic research at the time. “We had a good monetary framework in place, we stuck to it, and we didn’t panic when the exchange rate moved around along the way.”
Sure enough, New Zealand fell into recession in 1997 and 1998, while Australia endured only a period of subpar growth. Good policy, it turns out, has a way of creating good luck. And it wasn’t the only time.
Boring banking and avoiding the global financial crisis
If you had looked around the world circa 2006, you would have seen a number of countries where housing prices had soared into potential bubble territory, including the United States, Britain and Australia.
But two years later, while the United States and Britain were in a severe recession and financial crisis, Australia experienced only a single quarter of contraction. Why the difference?
The answer seems to be how the financial industries of those countries were structured and regulated. To understand that better, I sought out a tutor, one who turned out to have an unlikely background: David Morgan, a former child actor and professional Australian Rules Football player who later became one of the country’s leading bankers.
After a wave of deregulation in the 1980s, Australian banks took on ever-more-risky lending, especially for commercial real estate, and got into new business lines overseas in which they had no obvious competitive advantage. When that asset bubble popped and a recession arrived, the banks came near failure, and there was a wholesale firing of top bank executives.
It was a matter of “going through the furnace, and coming out tempered by experience,” said Mr. Morgan, who was chief executive of Westpac, one of Australia’s major banks, during the crisis. “We were adamant that we would go into the next shock with the least risk and the most resilience, and would not engage in any more offshore frolics.”
The banks — with prodding from regulators — reformulated themselves to take a more conservative and domestically focused approach to lending. After that near-death experience, there remained the “Big Four” banks that together control about 80 percent of deposits; they are not allowed to merge with each other.
The banks also did not engage in the kind of expansionist strategy that had gotten them in trouble in 1991. They did not open huge offices in Hong Kong, London or New York, nor get in the business of creating the complex mortgage securities that were the nexus of the financial crisis.
Good regulation was part of it. “They were good quality regulators; the public sector was getting good people,” Mr. Morgan said. Both major political parties have tended to be tough on banks, and there is a single powerful regulator rather than a patchwork of them as in the United States.
But just as important was the sense among bank leaders that they would need to be ready when the next downturn came.
It’s not as if Australia’s banks are perfect actors. A royal commission established to examine the industry found widespread misconduct, including abuses of customers, in a report issued this year.
But they have focused on lending to Australians, especially for home mortgages, and held those loans on their own books. No doubt Australia has missed out on some opportunities by not hosting the big, complicated banks that operate worldwide and do more sophisticated forms of finance. Sydney does not have the concentration of high-paying finance jobs that London and Hong Kong do.
But having a conservative, domestically focused, highly concentrated banking system meant that Australia wasn’t stuck importing other countries’ financial contagions when crises hit.
During the global financial crisis, Australia suffered from plummeting demand for its products. But a nicely designed fiscal stimulus — combined with a falling Australian dollar and an assist from aggressive stimulus by China — helped the country regain its footing rapidly and avoid the mass economic pain found in so much of the world.
The pessimism of 2019
If there’s anyone you would expect to be bullish, it might be the young adults entering the work force, who have never lived through a recession. But among them — as with other Australians who don’t occupy the halls of government or financial power — you find angst and uncertainty rather than boom-time optimism.
“I think there will be a recession within the next 10 years,” said George Ye, 25, who is studying for a master’s degree in data science at the University of Sydney. “I feel like sentiment is, we might have gotten to a peak. Things have gone so well for so long that the things we need to buy are getting more and more expensive,” especially housing. “I think the generation of people born 10 years prior to me are much more confident than I am.”
“I’m pessimistic,” said Freya Zemek, 24, an employee at the university. “I think we’re probably looking at a recession in 2020. Consumer confidence isn’t very high. The signs aren’t looking great, and I think it’s the sort of tightrope situation where we could be next for a recession. It’s only a matter of time. Nothing goes on forever.”
Housing especially seems to be in the opposite of a sweet spot. It’s still too expensive, especially in booming Sydney and Melbourne, for young people. Yet the prices are well below those from a couple of years ago, leaving recent buyers sitting on paper losses.
But just maybe, the contrast between a pessimistic mood and a long record of economic success isn’t as contradictory as it may seem.
Are recessions really necessary?
In November 1990, the Australian treasurer (and later prime minister) Paul Keating described a painful downturn then underway as “the recession we had to have.”
His point was that excesses in a lending and credit boom, combined with high inflation, meant that the Australian economy needed the wrenching experience of a downturn to rid itself of those excesses. It was also a horrible political gaffe, a comment that went over poorly in a country then burdened with an 11 percent unemployment rate.
But the question of whether he was right is profound — one that economists can still debate.
The great economic thinker Joseph Schumpeter argued that recessions served an essential purging mechanism enabling a society to become richer over time. Through business failures, capital is redeployed to emerging high-growth industries. In this thinking, recessions play a cleansing effect, clearing the way for the future.
Hyman Minsky, another 20th-century economist, argued that long periods of financial stability could breed complacency: The longer a nation goes without a downturn, the more risky behavior will build up in the economy, making the eventual downturn worse.
Those theories sound plausible. Data to support the case is a little harder to find. In fact, there is some evidence that recessions actually cause lasting damage to a country’s economic potential — that they hurt, rather than help — by thrusting people out of the work force unnecessarily and causing their skills to atrophy. Research shows that people who enter the work force during a recession take a hit to their earnings even decades later.
There have also been long periods when the Minskyite story has seemed not to apply, notably in the decades after World War II in the United States.
“I think Australia’s experience shows that you don’t need recessions to clean out the system, but it does show that what you need is strong, clear policy settings from governments,” said James Pearson, the chief executive of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry. “There is a risk, and I think we’re seeing it in Australia today, that a prolonged period of economic growth without recession can lead to complacency both among policymakers and the electorate.”
But that brings us back to the slowing housing market, and the general sense of pessimism that sneaks into conversations about the economy in Australia, especially among the young.
Maybe the real reason Australia has made it so long without a downturn is an absence of complacency. No one is brimming with overconfidence that all is well and always will be.
“What has happened in the last 27 years is a series of shocks, each of which, thanks to policy and luck, we were able to overcome,” said Stephen Grenville, the former deputy governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia and now a fellow at the Lowy Institute. “That’s the nature of the economy we’re in now — an economy with shocks plus flexibility.”
It isn’t the absence of bad stuff happening in the economy that has kept Australia growing for so long. It is the nation’s economic flexibility and policymakers’ rejection of complacency.
So maybe the pessimism isn’t a paradox at all. And maybe we would be more worried about Australia’s economic future if house prices had kept soaring toward unsustainable highs, or if young people had made economic decisions with a sense of reckless invincibility and engaged in borrowing and spending behaviors accordingly.
The Australian experience is evidence that the “business cycle” is a misleading way to think about economic growth. Recessions aren’t like thunderstorms, an inevitable, random event that may be violent but provide much-needed water to crops.
Maybe recessions are more like car crashes. They may never be completely eliminated, but making the right choices can make them rarer and less damaging when they do happen.
In trying to learn the lessons of Australia, that may be the biggest of them all. There will always be bad things that happen in an economy. The best way to keep them from causing the mass pain that accompanies a recession is to combine sound policy, a flexible and dynamic economy and — perhaps most important — just the right amount of fear."
econ_change of article is: irrelevant
###
article: "Economic Scene

* Send any friend a storyAs a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.,

The Gadsden Green Housing Complex in Charleston, S.C. The income of the typical American household increased 5.2 percent In 2015, the first real increase since 2007, the United States Census Bureau said Tuesday.

Travis Dove for The New York Times

Working families finally got a raise.

Early on Tuesday, the Census Bureau provided some long-awaited good news for the beleaguered working class: The income of the typical American household perched on the middle rung of the income ladder increased a hearty 5.2 percent In 2015, the first real increase since 2007, the year before the economy sank into recession.

Households all the way down the income scale made more money last year. The average incomes of the poorest fifth of the population increased 6.6 percent after three consecutive years of decline. And the official poverty rate declined to 13.5 percent from 14.8 percent in 2014, the sharpest decline since the late 1960s.

The numbers are heartening, confirming that the sluggish yet consistent recovery of the American economy has finally begun to lift all boats. They fit the story coming from the job market, which is about as tight as it has been in a very long time. They follow rises in the minimum wage across many states and municipalities.

“This shows the importance of robust labor markets,” said Jared Bernstein, a former top economic adviser to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. “If working-age Americans are going to get ahead, it is through a paycheck.”

And yet this positive news — while clearly undermining Donald J. Trump’s unbridled pessimism about the American economy — does not justify unbridled celebration, either.

“The next question is why did it take such a long time for things to look good?” said Arloc Sherman of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a left-leaning policy analysis group. As Sheldon H. Danziger of the Russell Sage Foundation put it, it’s great news that men’s earnings from work increased 1.5 percent. But they are still lower than in the 1970s.

The answer does not just involve sluggish growth. It is also about its distribution. Gains may be finally trickling down to those at the bottom of the ladder. But the numbers still offer a lopsided picture, with a gargantuan share of income rising to the top. While the bottom fifth of households increased their share of the nation’s income, by the census’s definition, to 3.4 percent from 3.3 percent, the richest 5 percent kept 21.8 percent of the pie, the same as in 2014.

“There’s an inequality problem,” Mr. Sherman added.

Against the backdrop of the last few decades, the income gains revealed on Tuesday underscore how difficult the American economy has made it for average workers to get ahead. In nearly every successive economic cycle, progress came slower and harder than in the previous one.

The data, which measured how Americans were doing six years into the economic recovery, show that incomes in the middle, measured in 2015 dollars, were still 1.6 percent below the previous peak of $57,423 a household, which was attained in 2007, just before the economy sank into what has come to be known as the Great Recession.

How does that look compared to the nation’s recent history? After the economy slipped into recession in 1969, it took only three years for incomes in the middle to rebound and surpass their previous peak. After the downturn of 1973, it took five; after back-to-back recessions in 1981 and 1982, it took seven.

And, except for the long expansion that ran from 1991 through 2000, it has been getting worse. The economic growth from late 2001 to about the end of 2007 never even managed to deliver incomes above the previous peak for the typical household, reached near the end of Bill Clinton’s presidency. The expansion underway today may not get there, either.

Today, median household incomes are still 2.4 percent below the absolute peak they hit in 1999 — when Facebook had yet to come into existence, the big news in the music business was Napster, and the good times in Silicon Valley were about to come crashing down with the collapse of the dot-com bubble.

At the bottom of the ladder, households at the 10th percentile — those poorer than 90 percent of the population — are still a bit poorer than they were in 1989. Americans have managed to develop an internet economy, invent social media and build driverless cars since then, but not to improve the lot of those at the bottom.

What’s more, changes starting in 2013 in the way the census asks people about their incomes can distort comparisons with previous years. After adjusting the data for these changes, according to Elise Gould of the Economic Policy Institute, the income of American households in the middle of the distribution last year was still 4.6 percent below its level in 2007 and 5.4 percent below where it was in 1999.

Men’s earnings from work increased 1.5 percent, according to the United States Census Bureau, but their incomes are still lower than in the 1970s.

Spencer Platt/Getty Images

Of course, the Census Bureau’s numbers on income and poverty don’t add up to a perfect representation of families’ means. For one thing, they include only “money income” — excluding in-kind government benefits like housing vouchers or food stamps. They don’t include the impact of taxes, ignoring the earned-income tax credit, which provides substantial help to families with low earnings.

The official poverty line, moreover, is assessed using a basket of necessities defined in the 1960s — which has little to do with people’s lives today. Over the last few years the census has also published an alternative Supplemental Poverty Measure — which keeps a better tab on Americans’ income and expenditures. Using that count, poverty dipped to 14.3 percent, the lowest level since the census began compiling it in 2009.

Analysts like Scott Winship of the right-leaning Manhattan Institute have argued for some time that long-term income numbers, like those published by the Congressional Budget Office, suggest that Americans in the middle of the income distribution and below have not done badly over recent decades. He concludes that the best strategy to promote the welfare of working Americans is to focus on improving overall economic growth. The fixation with inequality and income distribution, he says, will produce bad policy.

The current census data does suggest that growth can ultimately bring prosperity to average Americans. Still, it also points to the persistence of wide inequality as being at the center of the story.

Across the entire bottom 60 percent of the distribution, households are taking home a smaller slice of the pie than they did in the 1960s and 1970s. The 3.4 percent of income that households in the bottom fifth took home last year was less than the 5.8 percent they had in 1974. With their share shrinking with almost every economic cycle, it is hardly a surprise that it takes longer for them to experience any income gains at all. Growth, alone, is not adding to their prosperity as it once did.

By contrast, households in the top 5 percent have profited nicely from America’s expansions. In 2015, they took in $350,870, on average. That is 4.9 percent more than in 1999 and 37.5 percent more than in 1989.

Historical precedent suggests the latest economic expansion is getting long in the tooth. Lawrence Summers, Treasury secretary under Bill Clinton and a top economic adviser in President Obama’s first term, says there are better than even odds today that the United States will tip into a recession within three years. In July, Deutsche Bank said the probability of a recession within the next 12 months had jumped to 60 percent, the highest since August 2008. JPMorgan thinks the odds are 37 percent.

For all but Americans at the very top, that means that the punch bowl may well be taken away again before the party really gets going. That is not how a well-functioning economy should work."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "Economic Headwinds Mount as Leaders Weigh Costs of Confronting Russia
Alan Rappeport and
BRUSSELS — The world economy is heading into a potentially grim period as rising costs, shortages of food and other commodities and Russia’s continuing invasion of Ukraine threaten to slow economic growth and bring about a painful global slump.
Two years after the coronavirus pandemic emerged and left much of the globe in a state of paralysis, policymakers are grappling with ongoing challenges, including clogged supply chains, lockdowns in China and the prospect of an energy crisis as nations wean themselves off Russian oil and gas. Those colliding forces have some economists starting to worry about a global recession as different corners of the world find their economies battered by events.
Finding ways to avoid a slowdown while continuing to exert pressure on Russia for its war in Ukraine will be the primary focus of finance ministers from the Group of 7 nations who are convening in Bonn, Germany, this week.
At a news conference on Wednesday, Treasury Secretary Janet L. Yellen said that elevated food and energy prices were depressing both spending and economic output, creating what she called “stagflationary effects” all around the world.
“This is an environment that is filled with risks, both with respect to inflation, and also potential slowdowns,” Ms. Yellen said.
The economic challenges that governments around the globe are facing could begin to chip away at the united front that Western nations have maintained in confronting Russia’s aggression, including sweeping sanctions aimed at crippling its economy and efforts to reduce reliance on Russian energy.
Policymakers are balancing delicate trade-offs as they consider how to isolate Russia, support Ukraine and keep their own economies afloat at a moment when prices are rising rapidly and growth is slowing.
Central banks around the world are beginning to raise interest rates to help tame rapid inflation, moves that will temper economic growth by raising borrowing costs and could lead to higher unemployment. Christine Lagarde, president of the European Central Bank, last week signaled a possible increase in interest rates in July, which would be the ECB’s first such move in more than a decade.
Global growth is expected to slow to 3.6 percent this year, the International Monetary Fund projected in April, down from the 4.4 percent it forecast before both Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and China’s zero-Covid lockdowns.
On Monday, the European Commission released its own revised economic forecast, showing a slowdown in growth to 2.7 percent this year from the 4 percent estimated in its winter report. At the same time, inflation is hitting record levels and is expected to average 6.8 percent for the year. Britain’s annual inflation rate jumped to 9 percent last month, the highest in 40 years, the Office for National Statistics said on Wednesday. And some Eastern European countries face even steeper price increases, with Poland, Estonia, the Czech Republic, Bulgaria and Lithuania all facing inflation rates in excess of 11 percent.
Pressures on global supply chains also worsened in April as the Russian invasion of Ukraine and pandemic lockdowns in China made it more difficult for companies to source parts and products globally, a supply chain index published Wednesday by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York showed. That could further exacerbate shortages and price increases.
Eswar Prasad, the former head of the International Monetary Fund’s China division, summed up the challenges facing the G7 nations, saying that its “policymakers are caught in the bind that any tightening of screws on Russia by limiting energy purchases worsens inflation and hurts growth in their economies.”
“Such sanctions, for all the moral justification underpinning them, are exacting an increasingly heavy economic toll that in turn could have domestic political consequences for G7 leaders,” he added.
Still, the United States is expected to press its allies to continue isolating Russia and to deliver more economic aid to Ukraine despite their own economic troubles. Officials are also expected to discuss the merits of imposing tariffs on Russian energy exports ahead of a proposed European oil embargo that the United States fears could send prices skyrocketing by limiting supplies. Policymakers will also discuss whether to press countries such as India to roll back export restrictions on crucial food products that are worsening already high prices.
Against this backdrop is the growing urgency to help sustain Ukraine’s economy, which the International Monetary Fund has said needs an estimated $5 billion a month in aid to keep government operations running. The U.S. Congress is close to passing a $40 billion aid package for Ukraine that will cover some of these costs, but Ms. Yellen has called on her European counterparts to provide more financial help.
Finance ministers are expected to consider other measures for providing Ukraine with relief.
There is increasing interest in the idea of seizing some of the approximately $300 billion in Russian central bank reserves that the United States and its allies have immobilized and using that money to help fund Ukraine’s reconstruction. Treasury Department officials are considering the idea, but they have trepidations about the feasibility of such a move and the possibility that it would raise doubts about the United States as a safe place to store assets.
On Wednesday, Ms. Yellen dismissed the likelihood of such a move when she said liquidating Russian assets is “not something that is legally permissible in the United States.”
Ahead of the G7 meeting this week, American officials saw the economic challenges facing Europe firsthand. During a stop to meet with top officials in Warsaw on Monday, Ms. Yellen acknowledged the toll that the conflict in Ukraine is having on the economy of Poland, where officials have raised interest rates sharply to combat inflation. Poland has absorbed more than three million Ukrainian refugees and has faced a cutoff in gas exports from Russia.
“They have to deal with a tighter monetary policy just as countries around the world and the United States are,” Ms. Yellen told reporters. “At a time when Poland is committed to large expenditures to shore up its security, it is a difficult balancing act.”
A downturn may be unavoidable in some countries, and economists are weighing multiple factors as they gauge the likelihood of a recession, including a severe slowdown in China related to continuing Covid lockdowns.
The European Commission, in its economic report, said the E.U. “is first in line among advanced economies to take a hit,” because of its proximity to Ukraine and its dependence on Russian energy. At the same time, it has absorbed more than five million refugees in less than three months.
Deutsche Bank analysts said this week that they thought a recession in Europe was unlikely. By contrast, Carl B. Weinberg, chief economist at High Frequency Economics, warned in a note on Monday that with consumer demand and output falling, “Germany’s economy is headed for recession.” Analysts at Capital Economics predicted that Germany, Italy and Britain are likely to face recessions, meaning there is a “reasonable chance” that the broader eurozone will also face one, defined as two consecutive quarters of falling output.
Vicky Redwood, senior economic adviser at Capital Economics, warned that more aggressive interest rate increases by central banks could lead to a global contraction.
“If inflation expectations and inflation prove more stubborn than we expect, and interest rates need to rise further as a result, then a recession most probably will be on the cards,” Ms. Redwood wrote in a note to clients this week.
The major culprit is energy prices. In Germany, which has been most dependent on Russian fuel among the major economies in Europe, the squeeze is being acutely felt by its industrial-heavy business sector as well as consumers.
Russia-Ukraine War: Key Developments
In Mariupol. The bloodiest battle of the war in Ukraine ended in Mariupol, as the Ukrainian military ordered fighters holed up at a steel plant in the city to surrender. Russia said that nearly 1,000 Ukrainian fighters are in Kremlin custody, though their fate remains uncertain.
Russian gas shipments “underpin the competitiveness of our industry,” Martin Brudermüller, the chief executive of the chemical giant BASF, said at the company’s annual general meeting last month.
While calling to decrease its dependence, Mr. Brudermüller nevertheless warned that “if the natural gas supply from Russia were to suddenly stop, it would cause irreversible economic damage” and possibly force a stop in production.
The fallout from a gas embargo has been the subject of spirited debate among German economists and policymakers, with analyses ranging from manageable to catastrophic. The flow of energy is just one of several supply concerns in the industrial sector.
Rising food prices are another matter causing anxiety among finance ministers. The Treasury Department released a report on Wednesday laying out plans by the World Bank and other international financial institutions to combat food shortages.
The interruption of wheat exports from Ukraine and Russia, which together account for 28 percent of global exports, along with supply chain disruptions, a severe drought in India that has caused it to ban shipments of grain and Covid-related lockdowns in China, are also causing food prices to spiral and increasing global hunger, particularly in Africa and the Middle East.
The question for both American and European policymakers is how to corral leaping prices without sending their economies into recession. The Federal Reserve has begun raising interest rates to tame inflation in the United States, and its chair, Jerome H. Powell, has acknowledged that bringing prices down without seriously hurting the overall economy will be a challenge. Ms. Yellen suggested on Wednesday that the United States was well placed to withstand the turbulence, pointing to America’s strong labor market and healthy household finances. She predicted that the United States would not fall into a recession but that Europe could be a different matter.
“I think Europe is perhaps a bit more a bit more vulnerable, and of course, more exposed on the energy front than the United States,” she said.
That conundrum accounts for the reluctance of the European Central Bank to raise rates. In the plus column, the European Commission noted that unemployment in the eurozone was down, as were government deficits, even though war-related costs were rising.
While food prices are increasing around the world, the level of inflation varies widely. Food inflation was 2.5 percent in France and Ireland during the first three months of 2022 and 10 percent in Eastern European countries, while in Turkey and Argentina, it was 60 to 70 percent in March alone, according to an analysis last week from ING.
In a speech to the Brussels Economic Forum on Tuesday, Ms. Yellen made the case that Russia’s actions are a reminder that nations should not trade national security for cheap energy. She argued that it is crucial to reduce reliance on Russia and China and to accelerate investments in renewable resources.
“No country controls the wind and the sun,” Ms. Yellen said. “Let’s make sure that this is the last time that the global economy is held hostage to the hostile actions of those who produce fossil fuels.”
Alan Rappeport reported from Brussels and Bonn, Germany, and Patricia Cohen from London."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "Daily Business Briefing
The Russian economy contracted steeply in the second quarter as the country felt the brunt of the economic consequences of its war in Ukraine, in what experts believe to be the start of a yearslong downturn.
The economy shrank 4 percent from April through June compared with a year earlier, the Russian statistics agency said on Friday. It is the first quarterly gross domestic product report to fully capture the change in the economy since the invasion of Ukraine in February. It was a sharp reversal from the first quarter, when the economy grew 3.5 percent.
Western sanctions, which cut off Russia from about half of its $600 billion emergency stash of foreign currency and gold reserves, imposed steep restrictions on dealings with Russian banks and cut access to American technology, prompting hundreds of major Western corporations to pull out of the country.
But even as imports to Russia dried up and financial transactions were blocked, forcing the country to default on its foreign debt, the Russian economy proved more resilient than some economists had initially expected, and the fall in G.D.P. reported on Friday was not as severe as some had expected in part because the country’s coffers were flush with energy revenue as global prices rose.
Russia’s economic growth since annexation of Crimea
Year-over-year change in quarterly G.D.P.
Analysts, though, say the economic toll will grow heavier as Western nations increasingly turn away from Russian oil and gas, critical sources of export revenue.
“We thought it would be a deep dive this year and then even out,” Laura Solanko, a senior adviser at the Bank of Finland Institute for Economies in Transition, said of the Russian economy. Instead, there has been a milder economic decline, but it will continue into next year, putting the economy in a shallower recession for two years, she said.
Russia, a $1.5 trillion economy before the war started, moved quickly in the days after the invasion to mitigate the impact of sanctions. The central bank more than doubled the interest rate to 20 percent, severely restricted the flow of money out of the country, shut down stock trading on the Moscow Exchange and loosened regulations on banks so lending didn’t seize up. The government also increased social spending to support households and loans for businesses hurt by sanctions.
The measures blunted some of the sanctions’ impact. And as the ruble rebounded, Russia’s finances benefited from high oil prices.
“Russia withstood the initial sanction shock” and “has been relatively resilient so far,” said Dmitry Dolgin, the chief economist covering Russia at the Dutch bank ING. But, he noted, unless Russia manages to diversify its trade and finances, the economy will be weaker in the long term.
Retail trade declined about 10 percent, the statistics agency said, while wholesale business activity fell 15 percent.
Michael S. Bernstam, a research fellow at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, said the data released on Friday were in line with other reports from Russia. He, too, expects the economy to deteriorate in the second half of this year, and then again in 2023.
As the war drags on, many countries and companies will look to permanently end relationships with Russia and its domestic companies. Businesses will have trouble getting replacement parts for Western-made machines, and software will need updates. Russian companies will need to rearrange their supply chains as imports seize up.
The prospects for Russia’s energy industry, central to the country’s economy, are deteriorating. The United States and Britain have already banned Russian oil imports, and the country’s oil output will fall further early next year when the full impact of a European Union ban on imports comes into effect. Russia would need to find customers for roughly 2.3 million barrels of crude and oil products a day, which is about 20 percent of its average output in 2022, according to the International Energy Agency.
So far countries including India, China and Turkey have absorbed some of the lost trade from Europe and the United States, but it’s unclear how many new buyers can be found.
Reliance on Russian natural gas is also being reduced. In the final week of June, total European Union gas imports from Russia were down 65 percent from a year earlier, according to a report by the European Central Bank. Some of these declines were forced on Europe because Russia has been cutting its supplies of gas. But European countries have ramped up efforts to find alternative sources and are, for example, quickly developing infrastructure for additional imports of liquefied natural gas.
The economy will suffer as the “exhaustion of inventories of investment imports, enforcement of the E.U. oil embargo, higher financial pressure on households and their higher dependence on the state” take their toll, while the ability of the central bank and government to provide monetary and fiscal support is limited, Mr. Dolgin of ING wrote.
Shortly after the invasion of Ukraine, inflation in Russia soared as households scrambled for goods they expected to become scarce. In July, inflation was running more than 15 percent, according to the Russian central bank. Already, though, there are signs inflation is slowing down, and as a result the central bank has slashed interest rates to 8 percent, lower than they were before the war.
Last month, the bank said that business activity had not slowed as much as expected, but that the economic environment “remains challenging and continues to significantly constrain economic activity.”
The bank forecast that the economy will shrink 4 percent to 6 percent this year, much less than it originally expected right after the start of the war. That 6 percent figure also matches the latest update from the International Monetary Fund.
The economy will have a deeper contraction next year and not return to growth until 2025, the central bank said on Friday. The bank forecast that inflation would be 12 percent to 15 percent by the end of the year.
In coming months, supply chain issues will present challenges, as businesses constrained by sanctions try to alter their supply chains to replenish stockpiles of finished and raw goods.
“I don’t think the Russian economy is doing well at the moment,” Ms. Solanko said. But the idea that sanctions and the departure of companies from Russia would cause the economy to rapidly collapse was never realistic. “Economies just don’t vanish,” she said.
S&P 500 index
The stock market is set to notch the year’s best stretch of gains, as investors take comfort from early signals that inflation is slowing down and the economy is holding up.
The S&P 500 rose about 1.5 percent on Friday, putting the index on course for its fourth consecutive positive week, a feat it hasn’t achieved since October. The index is now around 15 percent higher than its low point in June, though it remains more than 10 percent lower for the year.
The rally stands in stark contrast to the first half of the year, when Wall Street suffered its worst start in half a century, as the war in Ukraine, soaring energy costs, rising interest rates and rapid inflation galvanized investors’ fears about the health of the economy.
In the past month, investors have welcomed data that showed cooling inflation, a robust labor market and resilient company earnings. Having braced for the worst, improvements in the outlook are being met with relief.
Federal Reserve officials have suggested that their campaign of interest rate increases to tame inflation is not yet done. But some investors see recent economic data as grounds for the central bank to move less aggressively, easing worries that higher borrowing costs could push the economy into a severe downturn.
“The peak of freaking out about inflation and interest rates is done and we are looking at something that is not quite as dramatic,” Michael Purves, the founder and chief executive of Tallbacken Capital, said.
The latest Consumer Price Index report, released on Wednesday, offered a moment of relief for Wall Street, as inflation slowed to 8.5 percent for the year to July, down from a 9.1 percent pace in the previous month. The data offered an early indication that the Fed’s attempt to pull inflation down may be having an effect.
What’s more, data showing that in July the economy regained all the jobs lost in the pandemic, along with weeks of better-than-expected earnings reports from companies, have assuaged some concern among investors that higher rates, which increase costs for companies, could cut more deeply into corporate America.
The CBOE Vix volatility index, also known as Wall Street’s “fear gauge” because it reflects a sense of investors’ uncertainty over stock market moves, dipped below its long-term average of 20 points this week. The Vix had stayed above that mark since April, so the lower reading could be a sign that investors’ consternation about another lurch lower has subsided.
“We’ve seen a succession of inflationary pressures begin to roll over,” said Patrick Palfrey, a senior US equity strategist at Credit Suisse, adding that this is “forcing” investors to re-evaluate their trading positions.
Bankers said that retail investors have helped drive the rally. Sharp rises in so-called meme stocks and an uptick in some cryptocurrencies also point to great participation by individual investors.
“The cornerstone of this is the labor market and it’s rock solid,” James Masserio, the co-head of equities for the Americas at Société Générale, said. “If you don’t have a job then you are not buying meme stocks.”
Experts also said that stock markets were primed to ratchet higher. Investors had scaled back their bets on the market because of uncertainty. The volume of trading has also been low, with many big investors taking vacations through August. As a result, even small amounts of buying interest have helped to lift the market, with momentum building as other investors chased returns.
Over $11 billion flowed into funds that buy U.S. stocks in the week through Wednesday, according to EPFR Global, the most in eight weeks.
But some warned that just as quickly as markets have recovered, they could come unstuck. Short-term gains are not unusual during periods of protracted losses, known as bear market rallies.
After the S&P 500 peaked in October 2007, it slid over 50 percent to November 2008 in the aftermath of Lehman Brothers’ collapse. Then, the index rose by almost 24 percent in a matter of weeks. But the sell-off was not over. The S&P 500 gave up all of those gains in early 2009, before bottoming out in March of that year.
Mr. Masserio said that the Fed’s task of lowering inflation back to its target of 2 percent was akin to turning an oil tanker around: slow and fraught with risk.
“Fundamentally, what had built up in the system is a lot trickier than what we can fix in six months of a shift in monetary policy,” he said, warning that the stock market’s woes may not yet be over.
Stocks are higher because the inflation outlook has improved and the economic backdrop remains supportive. While expectations are not as dour as they were, there are doubts about how long the rally can last.
“I am bullish on the market but I am still an anxious and nervous bull,” said Mr. Purves. “We are not out of the woods just yet.”
Five of China’s biggest state-owned companies, representing hundreds of billions of dollars in market value, will delist from the New York Stock Exchange in coming weeks, the firms said in a flurry of filings on Friday.
Three of the world’s biggest energy firms, PetroChina, Sinopec and Shanghai Petrochemical, said in separate statements that they would apply for a voluntary delisting of their American depositary shares. Two other state-owned giants, the insurer China Life and the aluminum producer Chalco, also said they would stop offering their shares in the United States, citing the administrative burden and costs related to maintaining the shares.
The companies’ share prices fell in early trading in New York on Friday, most by around 3 percent. Together, the companies have a combined market valuation of more than $300 billion.
They made their announcements amid rising tensions between Beijing and Washington, and greater scrutiny of Chinese companies listed in the United States since Congress passed legislation introducing stricter oversight of these firms in 2020.
American lawmakers have long complained that Chinese companies do not play by the same rules as other companies on U.S. stock exchanges. Despite years of discussions, Beijing and Washington have failed to strike an agreement that would give American regulators access to fully inspect the audit papers of U.S.-listed Chinese businesses.
A listing on Wall Street, with its deep investor base and liquid market, was once seen as a coveted position for China’s biggest companies and an important step for those aspiring to go global.
But tensions between China and the United States have spilled over into nearly every aspect of the relationship between the two countries, from defense to climate and finance. A contentious trip last week by Speaker Nancy Pelosi to Taiwan, which China has claimed as its own, has further inflamed the relationship. Hours after her visit, Beijing halted talks on military coordination, climate change and other issues.
China’s market regulator said the moves would not “jeopardize” fund-raising activities by the five firms, adding that they can choose from multiple markets. The companies will keep their listings in Hong Kong and mainland China.
“These companies have strictly complied with the rules and regulatory requirements of the U.S. capital market since their listing in the U.S. and made the delisting choice for their own business considerations,” the China Securities Regulatory Commission said in a statement on Friday.
All five companies were added to a list of Chinese firms that did not meet the auditing standards of U.S. regulators, outlined in the Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act that was passed in 2020.
Alibaba, the Chinese e-commerce giant listed in New York, is another firm that was recently added to the list of more than 270 companies. When news of its addition emerged this month, its U.S.-listed shares dropped 11 percent. The company said last month that it would soon seek a primary listing in Hong Kong, a move that would allow more investors from mainland China to invest in it.
Didi Chuxing, China’s answer to Uber, was among the first Chinese companies to announce plans to delist from the New York Stock Exchange late last year, signaling the end of a multiyear, trillion-dollar love affair between China and Wall Street.
The British economy contracted slightly in the second quarter, losing momentum as the country experiences a deepening cost-of-living crisis and economists predict that a recession will start later this year.
Gross domestic product fell 0.1 percent in April to June compared with the previous quarter, when the economy grew 0.8 percent, the Office for National Statistics reported on Friday.
The biggest drag on growth in the second quarter was a reduction in health services as pandemic measures, such as coronavirus testing and vaccine administering, declined. This was only partly offset by growth in consumer-facing services, such as travel agencies, restaurants and hotels, and spending related to the Queen’s Platinum Jubilee.
Britons are facing a bleak combination of stagnant or declining economic growth with one of the highest inflation rates among its rich-economy peers. In June, inflation climbed to 9.4 percent, the highest in 40 years, but isn’t expected to peak until it reaches 13 percent in October. The Bank of England, which has been steadily raising interest rates since December in an effort to restrain rapid price rises, predicted last week that the country would enter a recession at the end of the year and wouldn’t exit it until the beginning of 2024.
High inflation is squeezing household budgets and is expected to lead to a sharp decline in consumer spending, normally a major driver of economic growth, while soaring energy prices also constrain businesses. Household incomes, adjusted for inflation and taxes, are predicted to fall sharply this year and next, in the worst decline in records dating back to the 1960s, the central bank said.
British households are bracing for unsettlingly high energy bills in particular. In October, when the government price cap is reset, it could be 3,500 pounds ($4,256) per year, three times the amount a year ago. But the effects of high inflation can already be seen: In the second quarter, consumer spending, once adjusted for price increases, fell 0.2 percent.
Warnings about low growth and high inflation are ringing across the globe. The International Monetary Fund said late last month that the world might soon “be teetering on the edge of a global recession.”
The U.S. economy also shrank in the second quarter, after a decline in the first quarter, setting off a debate about whether the country was already in a recession.
The lingering effects of the pandemic and the economic consequences of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are evident in the British economy. In the second quarter, growth was dragged down by a decline in wholesale and retail business activities, with companies reporting that they were still hampered by supply chain disruptions and a drop in retail sales as people cut back on spending to cope with the rising cost of living.
The National Institute of Economic and Social Research, a think tank in London, argues that the British economy is already in a recession. This underscores the scale of the challenge facing the contenders to be the next prime minister, in a contest that concludes next month. Rishi Sunak, a former chancellor of the Exchequer, and Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, have clashed over the best approach to provide support for more households, through tax cuts or direct payments, as Britain’s economic outlook turns gloomier.
SEOUL — President Yoon Suk-yeol on Friday pardoned Lee Jae-yong, the de facto head of the Samsung conglomerate, who served prison time after being convicted of bribing one of Mr. Yoon’s predecessors.
Mr. Lee was released on parole last August. The pardon gives him a free hand to run Samsung, because it ends what had been a five-year ban on his return to management. But many South Korean business analysts believe that Mr. Lee had continued to control his empire through loyal subordinates, though Samsung has never explicitly confirmed that.
Mr. Lee was one of nearly 1,700 people pardoned by Mr. Yoon on Friday; most had been convicted of white-collar crimes and traffic violations. South Korean presidents often issue mass pardons to mark major holidays, like National Liberation Day, which falls on Monday, when the pardons will take effect.
“I hope that this special pardon will become an occasion for the people to pull their strength together to help overcome the economic crisis,” Mr. Yoon said during a cabinet meeting on Friday. He said many small-business owners had been among those pardoned.
Samsung is the most successful of the handful of family-owned conglomerates, known as chaebol, that helped make South Korea a global export powerhouse and still dominate the economy. Its Samsung Electronics unit alone accounts for nearly one-sixth of the country’s total exports.
Mr. Lee, also known as Jay Y. Lee, was convicted of bribing Park Geun-hye, the president at the time, to obtain government support for a merger of two Samsung subsidiaries. Ms. Park was impeached in 2016 over that bribe and other corruption accusations, and eventually went to prison herself, before being pardoned and released in December.
Mr. Lee was in the midst of a two-and-a-half-year prison term when he was paroled last year. Another tycoon, the Lotte Group chairman Shin Dong-bin. received a suspended prison sentence on charges related to Ms. Park, and was also pardoned on Friday by Mr. Yoon, who promised a business-friendly government as a presidential candidate this year.
Mr. Yoon, a former prosecutor, was a leading member of the investigative team whose work led to the conviction of Mr. Lee and Mr. Shin.
In South Korea, there is a long history of chaebol leaders who were convicted of graft-related crimes and later received presidential pardons, usually on the grounds that the country needed the leaders. Anticorruption activists have long argued that such pardons help to entrench corruption in South Korean politics.
An opposition lawmaker, Park Yong-jin, said on Friday that Mr. Yoon had confirmed the widely held belief that “you are free if you are rich, but guilty if poor.”
But business groups have tirelessly lobbied for such pardons, arguing that the economy benefits when chaebol leaders are free to run their empires. Recent public surveys found that a majority of South Koreans supported a pardon for Mr. Lee. In recent days, Mr. Yoon’s approval ratings have dipped below 30 percent, an unusually poor performance for a South Korean leader so early in office.
Though Mr. Lee’s title is vice chairman, he began running South Korea’s biggest and most lucrative conglomerate in 2014 when his father, Lee Kun-hee, Samsung’s chairman, was incapacitated by a heart attack. The elder Mr. Lee died in 2020.
“I am sincerely grateful for this opportunity to make a fresh start,” Mr. Lee said on Friday in a statement released through Samsung. “I will respond to the people’s expectations and the government’s thoughtful consideration by contributing to the economy through continuous investment and job creation for young people.”
South Korea has faced mounting uncertainty over its economy and national security, caused in part by the war in Ukraine, the growing tensions between the United States and China over Taiwan and North Korea’s expanding nuclear weapons threat.
South Korean news outlets said the pardon could encourage Mr. Lee to succeed his late father as chairman of Samsung and to deal more actively with challenges facing the company, at a time when the global chip industry is scrambling to address supply shortages caused in part by the Covid-19 pandemic.
Samsung, a global leader in the chip industry, must also deal with American pressure on South Korea to join a United States-led semiconductor supply chain alliance and with growing competition from China, which is investing aggressively in its own semiconductor industry.
Mr. Lee’s legal troubles are not over. He is on trial on separate criminal charges of stock price manipulation and unfair trading. Mr. Lee has said he is innocent.
Rivian, a fledgling electric-vehicle manufacturer, said Thursday that it lost $1.7 billion in the second quarter.
The company said it was continuing to struggle to get enough components to ramp up production to higher levels, but it affirmed its expectation that it would make 25,000 vehicles by the end of the year.
“Supply chain continues to be the limiting factor of our production,” the company said in a statement. “However, through close partnership with our suppliers we are making progress.”
Rivian said it generated $364 million in revenue from April to June, up from $95 million in the first three months of the year. It also said it had customer reservations for 98,000 vehicles at the end of June.
Rivian said last month that it produced 4,401 vehicles in the second quarter and delivered 4,467 to customers.
In a conference call, Rivian’s chief executive, R.J. Scaringe, said that the company was seeing improvement in component availability, and that it was optimistic it could increase output in the second half of the year.
“The second quarter saw a number of challenges in terms of semiconductors as well as overall ramping in our supply base,” he said. “As we look out over the remainder of the year, we have a lot of confidence” about accelerating production.
The company plans a second shift of production by the end of the third quarter and has started hiring workers for it, Mr. Scaringe said.
Rivian said it expected a full-year adjusted loss of $5.45 billion, up from an earlier forecast of $4.75 billion. It attributed the increase to higher material and shipping costs stemming from inflation, and costs associated with increasing production.
Rivian was once viewed as “the next Tesla,” an electric-vehicle maker poised to grow rapidly and unsettle century-old giants of the auto industry like Ford Motor, General Motors and Volkswagen. It planned to make an electric pickup and sport utility vehicle — models that would set it apart from the minimalist electric cars that Tesla produces.
The company gained billions of dollars in backing from investors including Ford and Amazon, which announced it intended to buy 100,000 electric delivery vans from Rivian.
Rivian’s initial public offering was the largest of 2021, and within a few days its stock price soared. For a time, the company’s market value was greater than that of Ford and General Motors combined.
But difficulty in sourcing critical computer chips and manufacturing troubles at its plant in Normal, Ill., kept production far below what the company had hoped for. It has also struggled to build delivery vans for Amazon. Rivian’s stock price plummeted, and investors remain concerned about the company’s prospects.
Now, as production is climbing, it faces a tougher competitive landscape. Ford has started making an electric pickup, the F-150 Lightning, which is likely to pass Rivian in sales by the end of the year. Ford, Volkswagen, Hyundai and several others have ramped up sales of electric S.U.V.s, and G.M. has said it will start selling an electric version of its Chevrolet Silverado pickup and a pair of electric S.U.V.s next year.
Buyers of some of Rivian’s vehicles are also expected to soon lose access to a federal tax credit under the climate bill that the House is expected to approve on Friday; the Senate passed it on Sunday. Under the bill, purchases of vans, S.U.V.s and pickups that sell for more than $80,000 will not qualify for tax credits. The credits will also not be available to individuals or couples who earn more than $150,000 or $300,000 a year.
Rivian said last month that it was laying off about 6 percent of its 11,500 employees. “To fully realize our potential, our strategy must support our sustainable growth as we ramp towards profitability,” Mr. Scaringe said in a letter to employees. “We need to be able to continue to grow and scale without additional financing in this macro environment.”
An earlier version of this article and its summary misstated Rivian’s production outlook for the full year. The company still expects to make 25,000 vehicles; it did not increase the forecast.
Fox News has selected its chief legal correspondent and late-night news anchor, Shannon Bream, to be the host of its signature political talk show, “Fox News Sunday,” elevating a woman to the role for the first time in the program’s 26-year history.
The job has been vacant since late last year, when Chris Wallace suddenly left after growing increasingly unnerved by the reduction of down-the-middle political programming at the network.
The show is something of an island in the Fox media world. Unlike the provocative conservative commentary served up in prime time on the Fox News Channel by hosts such as Tucker Carlson and Sean Hannity, the content on “Fox News Sunday” is more neutral, modeled after the traditional Sunday morning news programs based in Washington. Democratic lawmakers regularly sit for lengthy interviews on the program, even though many are reluctant to do so during the channel’s weekday programming.
“Fox News Sunday” airs first on the Fox broadcast network and then later in the day on the cable news network.
Ms. Bream is known to Fox viewers for her reporting on legal issues and the Supreme Court and as the host of the midnight news program on Fox News, “Fox News @ Night.” Initially, the program was broadcast at 11 p.m. before the network bumped it for a comedy show hosted by Greg Gutfeld, who is also a co-host of “The Five,” a round-table talk show that skews to a conservative point of view. The move was part of a programming shift at Fox that left some of its news anchors and correspondents, including Mr. Wallace, feeling marginalized.
Ms. Bream is the latest of several women to be promoted to senior positions at Fox under its chief executive, Suzanne Scott, who was chosen to overhaul the network’s toxic workplace culture in the aftermath of a series of high-profile sexual harassment lawsuits involving Roger Ailes, the network’s founder. In recent years, Ms. Scott, who served as Fox News’s head of programming before being named chief executive in 2018, has installed Martha MacCallum, Dana Perino, Harris Faulkner and Laura Ingraham as hosts."
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "The Toll of Student Debt in the U.S.
The amount of student debt held in America is roughly equal to the size of the economy of Brazil or Australia. More than 45 million people collectively owe $1.6 trillion, according to U.S. government data.
That figure has skyrocketed over the last half-century as the cost of higher education has continued to rise. The growth in cost has substantially been more than the increase in most other household expenses.
The average cost of college has risen faster than inflation
$25,000
$22,700 for ’20-’21
academic year
20,000
Average cost of public
higher education
adjusted for inflation
15,000
10,000
Not adjusted
for inflation
5,000
0
’80-’81
’90-’91
’00-’01
’10-’11
’20-’21
$25,000
$22,700
for ’20-’21
academic
year
20,000
Average cost of public
higher education
adjusted for inflation
15,000
10,000
Not adjusted
for inflation
5,000
0
1980-’81
’90-’91
2000-’01
’10-’11
’20-’21
$25,000
$22,700
for ’20-’21
academic
year
20,000
Average cost of public
higher education
adjusted for inflation
15,000
10,000
Not adjusted
for inflation
5,000
0
1975-’76
’80-’81
’85-’86
’90-’91
’95-’96
2000-’01
’05-’06
’10-’11
’15-’16
’20-’21
$25,000
$22,700
for ’20-’21
academic
year
20,000
Average cost of public
higher education
adjusted for inflation
15,000
Not adjusted
for inflation
10,000
5,000
0
1975-’76
’80-’81
’85-’86
’90-’91
’95-’96
2000-’01
’05-’06
’10-’11
’15-’16
’20-’21
The rising cost of college has come at a time when students receive less government support, placing a greater burden on students and families to take out loans in order to fund their education.
Funding from states in particular has steadily declined, accounting for roughly 60 percent of spending on higher education just before the pandemic, according to an analysis by the Urban Institute, down from around 70 percent in the 1970s.
States’ and local government’s share of spending on higher education has been declining
Share of higher education expenditures
100
%
Tuition-related charges
80
Other charges
60
40
State appropriations
and other sources
20
0
1980
’85
’90
’95
2000
’05
’10
’15
’19
100
%
Tuition-related charges
80
Other charges
60
40
State appropriations
and other sources
20
0
1980
’85
’90
’95
2000
’05
’10
’15
’19
To address the growing crisis, President Biden announced a plan on Wednesday to wipe out significant amounts of student debt for millions of people. It was a step toward making good on a campaign promise to alleviate, as Mr. Biden has said, an unsustainable problem that has saddled generations of Americans.
“The burden is so heavy that even if you graduate,” he said, “you may not have access to the middle-class life that the college degree once provided.”
The typical undergraduate student with loans now finishes school with nearly $25,000 in debt, an Education Department analysis shows.
According to the plan, borrowers will be eligible for $10,000 in debt relief as long as they earn less than $125,000 a year or are in households earning less than $250,000. (Income will be assessed based on what borrowers reported in 2021 or 2020.)
Student debt, however, has a widely disparate impact on different populations.
Black people are increasingly carrying a larger student debt load …
Share of families by race that have an education loan
35
%
30
Black 30%
25
Other 24%
20
White 20%
15
Hispanic 14%
10
5
0
’89
’92
’95
’98
’01
’04
’07
’10
’13
’16
’19
35
%
30
Black
30%
25
Other
24%
20
White
20%
15
Hispanic
14%
10
5
0
1989
’92
’95
’98
2001
’04
’07
’10
’13
’16
’19
… as are millennials, who owe far more than older and younger generations
Total balances of student loans by age
30-39
years old
$500 billion
$400
Under 30
40-49
$300
50-59
$200
60 and
older
$100
2005
2010
2015
2020
30-39
years old
$500 billion
$400
Under 30
40-49
$300
50-59
$200
60 and older
$100
2005
2010
2015
2020
As student debt has grown in recent years, people’s ability to repay it has declined.
When the pandemic brought the global economy to a standstill in 2020, President Trump issued a moratorium on student debt payments and forced interest rates down to zero. Mr. Biden adopted similar policies. The moves helped millions of people lower their loan balances and prevented borrowers unable to pay their loans from defaulting on them.
Nonetheless, there has been a sharp increase in the number of people whose loan balances have stayed the same or have grown since the start of the pandemic.
The pandemic moratorium lowered defaults, but balances still loom
Number of borrowers by loan status at the end of each year
+7.5 million borrowers
from 2019 to 2021
25 million borrowers
Balance is the same
or higher than one year prior
20
Balance is lower
15
–4.7 million
10
5
Defaulted
–1.5 million
90 days or more
deliquent
–1.8 million
2005
2010
2015
2020
Balance is the same or
higher than one year prior
+7.5 million borrowers
from 2019 to 2021
25 million borrowers
20
15
Balance is lower
10
–4.7 million
5
Defaulted
–1.5 million
90 days or more
deliquent
–1.8 million
2005
2010
2015
2020
On Wednesday, Mr. Biden announced that the pandemic-era pause on payments would expire at the end of the year. He also reiterated his commitment to providing relief, in particular to lower- and middle-income households. How exactly to do that has been a topic of debate inside the White House and out.
One provision of the program involves an income cap: Debt relief may apply only to individuals or families who earn below a certain amount. The point of that provision, according to the White House, is to make sure no one who earns a high income will benefit from the relief.
An independent analysis from the Wharton School of Business showed that households earning between $51,000 and $82,000 a year would see the most relief — regardless of whether an income cap were applied. This is in part because more people at middle income levels hold student loans.
With or without an income cap, most relief would go to middle-income households
Current plan
If no income cap
$10,000 per person, income
cap of $125,000 individual
or $250,000 household
$10,000 per person,
no income caps
Share of debt relief
10%
20
30
In the current plan,
14% of the debt relief
will go to the lowest
fifth of earners.
Bottom fifth
of earners
≤$28,784
Second-
lowest
fifth
≤$50,795
Middle fifth
≤$82,400
Second-
highest
fifth
≤$141,096
Top 10%
If there were no income cap,
only 2 percentage points
more relief would go to the
top 10 percent of earners.
Top fifth
of earners
>$141,096
Current plan
If there were no income cap
$10,000 per person, income cap of $125,000
individual or $250,000 household
$10,000 per person, no income caps
30% of debt relief
If there were no income cap, only
2 percentage points more relief would
go to the top 10 percent of earners.
In the current plan,
14% of the debt relief
will go to the lowest
fifth of earners.
20
10
Top 10%
Bottom fifth of earners
Second-lowest fifth
Middle fifth
Second-highest fifth
Top fifth of earners
≤$28,784
≤$50,795
≤$82,400
≤$141,096
>$141,096
Millions of people stand to benefit from the relief, but Mr. Biden’s announcement kicked off a heated debate about its merits.
On both sides of the political aisle, analysts and officials have worried about the plan’s effects on inflation, in part because wiping away debt could inject money into the economy. (White House economic advisers made the case that by resuming loan payments and including income caps, the plan would have a negligible effect on rising consumer prices.)
Others have argued that while the relief could help many people, it does not address the underlying problems of how expensive college has become. Some economists have even warned the move could encourage colleges and universities to raise prices with the federal government footing the bill.
“I understand that not everything I’m announcing today is going to make everybody happy,” Mr. Biden said on Wednesday. “But I believe my plan is responsible and fair.”"
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "Daily Business Briefing
Janet L. Yellen, the Treasury secretary, will discuss imposing sanctions on Russia’s gold reserves with a bipartisan group of senators on Wednesday, according to people with knowledge of the plans, as the United States and Europe prepare to level a new round of sanctions on Russian lawmakers this week.
The focus on gold reserves comes amid concerns that Russia is trying to utilize alternative assets to evade international sanctions and help prop up the ruble. The United States and its Western allies have taken steps to cut Russia off from much of the global financial system by freezing its international currency reserves and imposing sanctions on several major financial institutions and oligarchs.
Ms. Yellen plans to discuss proposed legislation to target Russia’s gold reserves with Senator Angus King, an independent from Maine, Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, Senator Bill Hagerty, a Tennessee Republican, and Senator Maggie Hassan, a Democrat from New Hampshire.
“Secretary Yellen regularly meets with members of Congress to discuss legislation,” said Morgan Finkelstein, a Treasury spokeswoman. “Additionally, Treasury staff frequently provide technical assistance on sanctions bills.”
Plans for a meeting this week between Ms. Yellen and lawmakers were reported earlier by Axios.
Lawmakers have been working on a variety of bills that would tighten sanctions and restrict trade with Russia. The Biden administration has broad authority to act alone on many of these measures, but Congress sometimes enacts legislation to pressure or force action from the White House.
The sanctions on gold reserves were proposed earlier this month and would block Russia from selling gold on international markets. The senators suggested that Russia’s $130 billion worth of gold reserves were a loophole in the sanctions that were imposed on Russia’s central bank. They said that Russia was laundering money through gold by buying and selling it for high-value currency.
Eswar Prasad, a former official at the International Monetary Fund, said that targeting gold would be another step in “tightening the financial noose around Russia.”
Gold sales are not specifically banned by the existing sanctions that are in place. The lawmakers who drafted the legislation are seeking to understand why the Treasury Department appears to be reluctant to impose sanctions on Russia’s gold reserves, according to one of the people with knowledge of their thinking.
The Treasury Department has not said that it is seeing Russia use gold to evade sanctions, though it has made clear that use of alternative assets such as cryptocurrencies would be a violation of U.S. law.
President Biden is expected to announce additional sanctions this week on hundreds of members of Russia’s lower house of Parliament and new measures to crack down on sanctions evasion during a series of global summits in Europe on Thursday.
Nestlé said Wednesday that it was suspending sales of its KitKat and Nesquik brands in Russia, the latest effort from a global consumer giant to rethink operations there as the country wages war on Ukraine.
Global brand owners including Unilever, Procter & Gamble and Coca-Cola have been under pressure to pull out of Russia as Western countries try to squeeze Russia’s economy and thwart its ability to fund the war. But these brands are balancing concerns, such as leaving behind investments in brands and factories, potentially disrupting complex supply chains and supporting sometimes sizable workforces.
Nestlé said it was suspending sales of “the vast majority” of its prewar volume of products in Russia, including pet food, coffee and candy. It had already halted “nonessential” imports and exports into and out of Russia, alongside advertising and capital investment. The company is also fully complying with all international sanctions on Russia, it said.
“While we do not expect to make a profit in the country or pay any related taxes for the foreseeable future in Russia, any profit will be donated to humanitarian relief organizations,” the company said Wednesday.
Nestlé said its business in Russia would “focus on providing essential food” to residents, like infant food and medical nutrition. Other brands, like Danone and PepsiCo, have similarly said they would continue production of food and products deemed basic necessities. Critics have said such moves undermine efforts to starve the Russian economy and pressured companies to make all-or-nothing breaks from Russia. Maintaining even limited operations in Russia would make it easier for brands to restart broader business there, when or if they needed to.
Lawmakers in the United States, Britain and Ukraine have urged companies to cut ties, and President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine has specifically pointed to Nestlé.
“‘Good food. Good life.’ This is the slogan of Nestlé. Your company that refuses to leave Russia,” Mr. Zelensky said on Saturday in a video message addressing antiwar protesters in Bern, Switzerland.
Economic sanctions imposed by the United States, Europe and their allies have shaken the Russian economy and caused the value of the ruble to plunge.
On Wednesday President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia came up with a way to get his opponents to help prop up his currency, by demanding that “unfriendly countries” use rubles to buy the Russian oil and gas that is still flowing.
“I have made a decision to implement in the shortest possible time a set of measures to switch payments for … our natural gas supplied to the so-called unfriendly countries to Russian rubles,” Mr. Putin said on Wednesday.
Sanctions aimed at the Russian central bank effectively froze hundreds of billions of dollars of assets. The actions immediately drove down the value of the ruble as people frantically rushed to turn their rubles into a more stable currency, like the dollar or the euro.
The central bank took several steps to support the currency, including doubling interest rates to 20 percent as a way to entice people to keep their rubles in the bank.
That freeze, Mr. Putin said, was evidence that the dollar and euro “compromised themselves” and were unreliable.
Claus Vistesen, chief eurozone economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, said the action means that every time a Western country buys a barrel of oil it would be “propping up his domestic currency.”
“If you’re invoiced in rubles, you’ve got to go out and buy rubles,” he said. “I don’t know if there is workaround.”
In Britain, the economic shock waves of the war in Ukraine are exacerbating a squeeze on household budgets and heightening fears of a cost of living crisis. The British government on Wednesday announced some measures to help people cope with the rising prices, which are at their highest level in three decades, including cutting gas prices.
Rishi Sunak, the chancellor of the Exchequer, said that the sanctions on President Vladimir V. Putin’s government and the efforts to isolate Russia were also weighing on the British economy. This was most acutely felt in the cost of living, he said.
“The actions we have taken to sanction Putin’s regime are not cost-free for us at home,” Mr. Sunak told lawmakers as he announced an update to the Treasury’s tax and budget plans on Wednesday. Hours earlier, the Office for National Statistics said inflation was at its highest level since 1992, with prices rising by 6.2 percent from a year earlier.
The interventions announced on Wednesday were limited. For a year, the government will cut taxes on petrol and diesel by 5 pence a liter. (The rate had been frozen for more than a decade.) Local authorities will get another 500 million pounds to support low-income households. And the biggest announcement of the day was the raise to the income threshold that workers must meet before they begin to pay National Insurance, a broad tax that funds state pensions and some benefits.
“The cut in fuel duty, though very welcome, is just a drop in the ocean compared to the larger tsunami of surging costs that is bearing down on firms and households,” Shevaun Haviland, director general of the British Chambers of Commerce, said in a statement.
The Office for Budget Responsibility, which provides independent economic and fiscal forecasts for the government, downgraded its outlook for the economy. Gross domestic product will increase 3.8 percent this year and 1.8 percent next year, it said on Wednesday. Six months ago, the agency forecast a growth of 6 percent this year and 2.1 percent in 2023. Inflation will average 7.4 percent this year and won’t fall back below the central bank’s target of 2 percent until 2024, it said.
The outlook for household incomes was even bleaker. With inflation factored in, household disposable incomes per person will drop by 2.2 percent in the next fiscal year beginning in April, the Office for Budget Responsibility said. That would be the largest fall in a single financial year since official records began in 1956.
Despite the deteriorating economic outlook, Mr. Sunak seemed reluctant to deviate too far from his previous spending and tax plans. It was the Treasury’s first fiscal announcement since Britain ended its pandemic restrictions, having already spent about £311 billion ($410 billion) in the first year of the pandemic on health services, businesses and workers. And Mr. Sunak has repeatedly stated the need to repair the public finances, temporarily raise some taxes and reduce government spending.
The government was pushing ahead with a plan to raise National Insurance for employers and workers from next month, to ease the backlog at the National Health Service and fund adult social care.
Stellantis, maker of Chryslers and Jeeps, and LG will spend $4 billion on a new battery factory in Ontario.
Stellantis and a partner, LG Energy Solution, said on Wednesday that they would jointly build a battery plant in Windsor, Ontario, to provide the critical components for a range of electric Jeeps and trucks the automaker aims to introduce over the next several years.
The two companies expect to invest $4.1 billion in the factory and create 2,500 jobs. Stellantis, which was formed last year through a merger of Fiat Chrysler and the French automaker Peugeot, has long operated a minivan plant in Windsor.
The new factory is the latest in a series of plants auto manufacturers have said they will build in North America as they rush to produce electric cars and trucks and catch up to Tesla, which dominates the fast-growing market for electrics. General Motors expects a battery plant in Lordstown, Ohio, to start production this summer, and it is building a second one in Tennessee. Ford Motor has announced plans to build two battery plants in Kentucky and a third in Tennessee. Toyota has chosen North Carolina for a battery plant.
Stellantis said this month that it aimed to introduce 25 electric vehicles in the United States by 2030 and that it planned to build at least two battery plants in North America. The new models include an electric Jeep to be introduced next year and an electric Ram pickup truck in 2024.
“Our joint venture with LG Energy Solution is yet another steppingstone to achieving our aggressive electrification road map in the region, aimed at hitting 50 percent of battery-electric vehicle sales in the U.S. and Canada by the end of the decade,” Stellantis’s chief executive, Carlos Tavares, said in a statement.
Ford is expected to start producing an electric version of its F-150 pickup in April. G.M. expects to start making an electric Chevrolet Silverado truck next year.
Bankers racked up their highest bonuses ever in New York last year, but their good fortune may be running out.
Employees in New York City’s securities industry got extra payouts averaging $257,500 in 2021, up 20 percent from their previous peak a year earlier, according to an estimate by Thomas P. DiNapoli, the state comptroller.
“Wall Street’s soaring profits continued to beat expectations in 2021 and drove record bonuses,” Mr. DiNapoli said in a statement on Wednesday. “But recent events are likely to drive near-term profitability and bonuses lower.”
Markets remain turbulent during the recovery from the pandemic, and Russia’s war on Ukraine only increases the uncertainty of the global economic outlook, Mr. DiNapoli said.
The surge in compensation in the financial sector surpassed the city’s projections and will allow it to raise more income-tax revenue than it had expected, even as the pandemic continues to weigh on other industries. “We won’t get back to our pre-Covid economic strength until more New Yorkers and more sectors — retail, tourism, construction, the arts and others — enjoy similar success,” Mr. DiNapoli said.
The 180,000 employees in the securities industry comprise only 5 percent of the city’s private sector work force but account for a fifth of its wages, according to the estimates. One in nine jobs in New York City are connected to Wall Street.
Still, the pay bumps haven’t stopped droves of bankers from changing jobs amid pandemic-inspired ennui, blockbuster profits and fierce competition for talent. Itchy feet have forced big banks to open their wallets: Compensation costs at the nation’s six largest lenders rose 12 percent to nearly $178 billion combined last year.
The Swiss bank UBS will offer a slice of its U.S. employees the chance to work remotely all the time.
It will select eligible workers for the program from its 20,500 U.S. employees in the next few months, starting with its wealth management division, it said in a statement. A bank spokeswoman said the company ultimately expects about 10 percent of those workers to go fully remote. Three-quarters could work on a hybrid basis, according to the spokeswoman, Erica Chase.
The first cohort of work-from-home roles could include data analysts, business managers, project managers and operations staff, followed by compliance and finance roles outside the wealth unit. About 800 UBS employees are currently working remotely on a permanent basis.
“This framework will provide an enhanced work-life balance for some of our employees, appeal to a more diverse pool of applicants and increase employee retention,” Tom Naratil, the president of UBS in the Americas, said in a statement. “We recognize the world has changed.”
UBS said 86 percent of employees it surveyed valued more flexibility.
Ralph Hamers, the bank’s chief executive, has embraced hybrid working — more so than the leaders at some American banking giants, who have been eager to get employees back into their offices, albeit with mixed success. After several false starts, executives at companies of all types have rolled out a flurry of return-to-office plans in recent weeks.
Marc Montanaro, UBS’s head of human resources in the Americas, said the bank recognized that employees are more satisfied and productive when they have greater control over their schedules.
“Our employees have different needs and demands on their time based on their location, family and personal life, career stage and other factors — some of which change over time,” he said.
The Education Department says it will hold companies that own certain private colleges financially responsible for taxpayers’ losses if their schools defraud students or abruptly shut down.
“If a company owns, controls or profits from a college, it should also be on the hook if the institution fails students,” James Kvaal, the department’s under secretary, said in the announcement on Wednesday.
Taxpayers have been left with billions of dollars in losses in recent years when student loans made by the government were wiped out because the students were victimized by the schools they attended. The vast majority of those losses stem from for-profit schools that have come under increasing scrutiny for their educational practices.
When a college suddenly closes, stranded students can have their federal student loan debt forgiven through what’s known as a closed-school discharge. Another relief program, called borrower defense to repayment, can eliminate the federal student loan debt of students who were significantly misled by their school’s false claims. In both cases, taxpayers are typically stuck paying the tab.
The department will require the new guarantees on a rolling basis, as schools sign or renew the agreements that let them receive federal student loan funds. It plans to demand them from private colleges and universities showing signs of potential distress and from those changing ownership.
A series of collapses at large for-profit chains have sent claims through both relief programs soaring in recent years. Last month, the Education Department approved borrower-defense claims for thousands of students who attended DeVry University — the first time it has granted claims at a still-operating school. The department said it would try to recoup some of that cost — at least $72 million, with the bill likely to grow — from DeVry’s current owner, which bought the long-troubled school in 2018.
The new policy does not guarantee that taxpayers will be repaid for future claims, however. Most investors or organizations that buy schools do so through holding companies, and if the institution implodes, the holding company is typically left with few assets.
In 2019, for example, dozens of schools owned by Dream Center, a Christian nonprofit with no experience in higher education, collapsed barely a year after the organization bought them. While Dream Center is still operating, the entity that owned the schools — Dream Center Educations Holdings — is in receivership.
But the new rule also allows the Education Department to require companies with “substantial control” over schools to sign these agreements. That could make investment companies, including some private equity firms that are active in the for-profit education market, responsible for the debt if their schools fail.
“Too often the department has seen those who reap the rewards of colleges’ actions when things go well leave us holding the bag when things go badly,” said Richard Cordray, the head of the department’s Federal Student Aid division. “We will be vigilant in our oversight and enforcement of this new policy.”
BRUSSELS — Strict state-aid rules that prevent European governments from subsidizing companies will be loosened, the European Union said on Wednesday, so that states can support businesses hit hard by the fallout of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the sanctions that have been imposed in response.
The European Commission, the E.U. executive arm, said that it had agreed on a “temporary crisis framework” that would apply to state aid. The new temporary rules will allow member states to subsidize companies if they can show that they have suffered losses because of European sanctions against Russia, or Russian sanctions imposed in response to them.
Three kinds of aid will be permitted, the commission said in a statement: Governments will be allowed to give companies money; to extend credit lines so that companies stay financially healthy; and to directly compensate companies if they’ve suffered “additional costs incurred due to exceptionally high gas and electricity prices,” especially if they are so-called “energy-intensive” businesses.
The commission laid out details of how such state aid might work, including by capping it in certain cases, limiting how much money governments can provide for businesses that are affected by the war and its impact on energy prices, or more broadly.
The looser state-aid measures show that the European Union, which is normally very strict on restricting payments to companies and regularly fines governments for overstepping, is prepared to rewrite the rule book in view of the mounting economic costs that the broad E.U. sanctions on Russia are incurring at home.
And while the new rules are described as “temporary,” there is no specific timeline in the statement for a return to the normal way of doing business.
BRUSSELS — European Union countries are starting a fraught but urgent debate on how to immediately deal with booming energy prices and the prospect of fuel shortages, both linked to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, as they attempt to cut remaining ties to Russia’s economy. The European Commission on Wednesday unveiled a set of options for E.U. leaders to look at during a meeting later in the week.
The bloc faces a dual energy crisis as its broad sanctions against Russia, along with sanctions from the United States and other Western allies, are failing to stop President Vladimir V. Putin’s plans for the war on Ukraine.
Energy prices, already significantly higher this year because of the pandemic, are spiraling out of control, posing dire implications for European consumers and businesses. Energy costs are not only slowing down the bloc’s postpandemic economic recovery but also fueling inflation, which is at a historic high, and further undermining growth.
And as the bloc contemplates how to urgently wean itself off Russian oil and gas — and prepares for the possibility that Russia might itself decide to cut or disrupt supply to Europe — E.U. countries are facing shortages for next winter. How to fill that gap, and make their sanctions against Russia more effective, hinges on a complex joint operation of buying and storing fuels across the bloc.
European Union leaders are set to discuss their options and possibly reach some early agreement in Brussels on Thursday and Friday, but the debate is acrimonious, as some countries want direct market interventions to subsidize consumers while others would prefer minimal tinkering with market dynamics.
The options paper presented by the European Commission on Wednesday included different ways of curbing energy prices for consumers and businesses, by intervening at the wholesale and retail levels through price caps, price subsidies and other types of interventions, including cutting tax costs for energy spending.
The paper also lays out ways in which the bloc can take a leap into jointly buying fuels and storing them communally. That would mean that the storage for oil, gas and liquefied natural gas in one E.U. state could also be used to save fuels for another member that didn’t have sufficient storage capacity. The goal of these options would be to fill up storage facilities immediately and guarantee sufficient supply for the entire European Union for next winter.
The commission proposal would mandate that member states fill up 80 percent of their underground storage facilities, which would require mass purchases in the immediate future, during the year’s warmer months.
All the options under consideration, the commission said in its options analysis, would cost E.U. governments money and probably distort global energy pricing and availability in the spring and summer, especially if E.U. leaders agree to make mass joint energy purchases immediately.
Today in the On Tech newsletter, Shira Ovide writes that unlike so many of our online experiences, shopping is one area that has remained mostly local."
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "Daily Business BriefingAug. 2, 2021, 4:12 p.m. ET
States can allocate some of The $10 billion in federal funding for struggling homeowners to help people who bought their residences with nontraditional home loans, according to Treasury Department officials.
Guidance issued on Monday for the new Homeowners Assistance Fund allows states to provide financial aid to qualified residents who face foreclosure on a loan for a mobile home or a home acquired through a contract for deed — a loan financed by the seller of the property. Some elderly residents who have taken out a reverse mortgage on their homes — a deal in which borrowers can get cash for the equity in their house — may also qualify for the emergency assistance money.
Advocates and some state governments had prodded the Treasury Department to extend the program’s support to those who do not have traditional mortgages. A handful of states, including Texas and New York, drew up preliminary plans that would allow them to allocate some of the money in the Homeowners Assistance Fund to those with mobile homes or houses acquired through contracts for deed, which are sometimes called land contracts.
Such homeowners are among the most vulnerable because they can be easily foreclosed on or evicted after they miss just a few payments. And these borrowers, who typically have poor credit ratings, tend to pay higher-than-normal interest rates on the loans they take out to acquire their residences.
The $10 billion allocated to the Homeowners Assistance Fund was included in the American Rescue Plan, the $1.9 trillion measure enacted by Congress and the Biden administration to help keep Americans “experiencing hardships associated with the pandemic” in their homes. The money is being allocated to states, Native American tribes and U.S. territories.
The Homeowners Assistance Fund is separate from the $47 billion that the federal government is giving to states to provide rental assistance to tenants facing eviction and that was also included in the American Rescue Plan.
The tide has begun to turn on corporate vaccine mandates, with large employers including the Walt Disney Company, Facebook, Google and Walmart introducing stricter requirements for employees returning to the workplace. But the policies come with some important caveats as executives juggle public health, labor relations and the bottom line, the DealBook newsletter reports.
So far, with the exception of the health care industry, corporate vaccine mandates tend to cover the white-collar workers whom executives want back in the office, not the lower-income workers on the front lines who are less likely to be vaccinated.
Walmart’s vaccination mandate, for example, doesn’t cover the company’s most vulnerable employees: workers at its stores and warehouses. The retailer, the biggest private employer in the United States, announced mandatory inoculation for employees at its headquarters and for managers who travel domestically. For a sense of scale, about 17,000 of Walmart’s 1.6 million employees are expected to work in new headquarters in Bentonville, Ark.
One fear that companies have with broad vaccine mandates is that they could drive away employees when workers are already in short supply, especially in industries like retail and restaurants. At the same time, not requiring vaccines may make other groups of workers anxious and more likely to quit.
“For Walmart, they have to weigh, I think, which is a real concern about turnover, what the reputation would be to the frontline workers, against the value that they could parlay this into saying, ‘We’re a leader in public health now as a big employer,’” said Peter Berg, a professor of employment relations at Michigan State University.
“From Walmart’s calculus, they may say, ‘Well, it’s really not going to benefit us that much as an organization to do this,’” he added.
For other companies, like airlines, negotiating mandates with unions, which are themselves mixed on the issue, adds complexity. As part of a deal reached in May between United Airlines and its union, the Air Line Pilots Association, for example, vaccinations will not be mandatory for pilots. But a deal agreed to among Hollywood’s major unions will allow studios to require everyone on a production set to be vaccinated.
“If you look at the divide of who is not vaccinated, it is people of lower income, it is people who are less likely to be insured, it is people in the states that reflect the politicization of the pandemic,” said Dr. Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, vice dean for population health and health equity at the University of California, San Francisco.
Companies that adopt partial mandates that “further widen” that gap, she said, would “only go so far” in achieving what the vaccination drives were meant to accomplish.
Advertisement
As the makers of the two largest mobile operating systems, Google and Apple have copied each other’s smartphone software for years. Now Google has taken a page from Apple’s hardware playbook: The search giant has designed the computing chip powering its latest phones.
On Monday, Google unveiled its Pixel 6 phones, the first to include its custom chips, which are called Tensor. The Tensor chip will enable the phones to rapidly perform complex computing tasks, the company said.
Google’s Android mobile operating system is by far the most widely used in the world, but its Pixel sales are dwarfed by those of Apple smartphones. A major disadvantage for Google has been its approach to hardware: Because it relied on third parties for mobile chips, it couldn’t make its phones as zippy as competitors that designed their chips in house.
In 2008, Apple acquired P.A. Semi to design the mobile processors that would eventually power its iPhones and iPads.
Now Google, with its own chip design, has embedded the most complex and frequently used algorithms, like voice transcriptions and advanced photography effects, into the processor to improve speeds, said Rick Osterloh, Google’s head of devices and services. That could give the Pixel a boost to compete with Apple and Samsung, which dominate the high-end phone market.
Google’s goal of a successful phone business has been expensive and rocky. After acquiring Motorola Mobility for $12.5 billion a decade ago and failing to sell a hit phone, Google sold the company three years later to Lenovo for about $3 billion. In 2018, Google closed a $1.1 billion deal to acquire most of HTC’s smartphone design unit, with more than 2,000 HTC engineers moving to Google.
Google’s investment in its in-house chip will lead to higher costs for consumers. Prices will be announced when the Pixel 6 phones are released this fall, Mr. Osterloh said, but he confirmed that the premium model, Pixel 6 Pro, was expected to surpass the cost of last year’s Pixel 5, which started at $700.
With the coronavirus spreading across the country and hospitalizations rising again, and public health officials warning that the Delta variant carries new risks even for vaccinated people, big businesses are rethinking their plans.
Some are delaying their plans to bring workers back to the office, and others are restoring mask requirements for customers. In the last week, several have also imposed vaccine mandates, after having held off on such a step for months.
The decision to require vaccines was endorsed on Sunday by the director of the National Institutes of Health. Speaking on CNN’s “State of the Union,” Dr. Francis Collins said that asking employees for proof of vaccination or regular testing were steps “in the right direction.”
Here’s how some big businesses changed their plans in late July:
Delayed return to office:
Lyft pushed back its return-to-office date to February from September, Google extended its work-from-home policy to mid-October, and Apple said employees would not be expected to return to the office until at least Oct. 1, a month later than before.
Uber said that it would not require employees to return until Oct. 25, instead of its initial September date, and that a further delay was possible if cases kept rising.
Twitter shut its San Francisco and New York offices, putting a halt to reopening plans without a timeline in place.
The New York Times Company also indefinitely postponed its planned return to the office, telling employees that they would be given four weeks notice before being expected to return. The company, which employs about 4,700 people, had planned for workers to start to return for at least three days a week in September. Its offices will remain open for those who want to go in voluntarily, with proof of vaccination.
Endeavor, the parent company of the William Morris Endeavor talent agency, closed its recently reopened offices after Los Angeles County reimposed its indoor mask mandate. An Endeavor spokesman said the company had decided that enforcement would be too difficult and would hinder group meetings.
Vaccine requirements:
Equinox, the luxury fitness company that includes SoulCycle, said on Monday that its members and employees must show one-time proof of vaccination — a physical immunization card, a photo of an immunization card or a digital vaccine card — to enter Equinox clubs, SoulCycle studios or corporate offices, starting in New York in September.
Walmart, the nation’s largest private employer, with nearly 1.6 million workers, said vaccines would be mandatory for employees in its headquarters and for managers who traveled in the United States. The mandate does not apply to much of its work force — employees in stores, clubs, and distribution and fulfillment centers.
The Walt Disney Company said salaried and nonunion hourly U.S. employees at its sites must be fully vaccinated. Unvaccinated workers who are already on site will have 60 days to get the immunization, and new hires will be required to be fully vaccinated before starting work.
Masks requirements:
Home Depot said all its associates, contractors and vendors will be required to wear a mask in its stores, distribution centers and offices and at the homes and businesses of customers. Customers will also be asked to wear masks. Lowe’s also said it would require masks of its employees, regardless of vaccination status.
Walmart said it was reinstating mask requirements for associates in areas of the country with substantial or high transmission rates. The company recommended that customers wear masks in those areas, too. The retailer also doubled its reward to employees who get vaccinated from $75 to $150.
Starting Monday, the Florida-based grocery chain Publix will require employees to wear masks in all its stores regardless of their vaccination status.
Apple said employees and customers would have to wear masks regardless of their vaccination status in more than half its stores in the United States. Apple said the stores would be determined by the rate of coronavirus cases in the area. Apple also told its employees that they would have to wear masks when inside the company’s main offices in the United States, regardless of whether they were vaccinated.
To understand work culture in China, start with a number: 996.
It’s shorthand for the grueling schedule that has become the norm at many Chinese firms: 9 a.m. to 9 p.m., six days a week.
The term originated in the technology sector about five years ago, when the country’s nascent internet companies were racing to compete with Silicon Valley. At first, workers were willing to trade their free time for overtime pay and the promise of helping China match the West.
China’s economy has grown into the second-largest in the world, after that of the United States. Tech behemoths like Alibaba, Huawei and ByteDance, which owns TikTok, are household names. But recently, more tech workers are resisting the at-all-costs culture, Vivian Wang writes for The Morning newsletter.
Some in China’s working class dismiss the complaints as elite griping; after all, tech workers are highly paid and educated. But the debate also offers a window into the country’s economy more broadly, and the expectations of its young people.
The first major pushback to 996 came in 2019, as China’s economic growth slowed and tech workers began questioning their work conditions. Online protests followed, but the movement faded under government censorship.
This year, 996 shot back into the news after two workers died at Pinduoduo, an e-commerce giant. Since then, some companies have taken steps to improve work-life balance.
The pushback to 996 also reflects the hopes and anxieties of China’s young people.
Many are willing to endure the working conditions because of the competitiveness of the job market. The number of college graduates in China rose by 73 percent in the past decade, a stunning achievement for a country that had fewer than 3.5 million university students in 1997. As a result, more people are competing for a limited pool of white-collar jobs.
But it’s also clear that many are sick of the rat race. Some Gen Zers have turned to reading Mao Zedong’s writings on communism to rage against capitalist exploitation. An online trend this year called on young people to “tangping,” or “lie flat” — essentially, to opt out.
The Chinese Communist Party sees the burnout and the threat it poses to economic growth. On the one hand, it has promised to better support college graduates in their job hunt. But it has also censored discussions of tangping.
What began as a conversation about tech companies’ treatment of elite workers has expanded to include lower-skilled workers, especially gig laborers.
Middle-class Chinese people have increasingly shown solidarity with those workers. Last year, when package couriers went on strike before a major shopping holiday, many on social media cheered them on.
Advertisement
Square announced on Sunday a $29 billion, all-stock deal to buy Afterpay, an Australian specialist in the “buy now, pay later” sector. The financial technology firms described the deal as a way to take on the traditional banking industry by building out an alternative to credit cards.
Square plans to incorporate Afterpay’s service, which allows users to stagger the cost of their purchases over interest-free installments, to its payment platforms that serve U.S. consumers and millions of small businesses. Square is run by Jack Dorsey, who also heads Twitter.
Square’s Cash App, a payment platform with more than 70 million customers, has been a key point of growth for the company, particularly during the pandemic as customers have sought out cash-free options. Afterpay works with more than 16 million consumers and nearly 100,000 merchants globally.
Installment plans were traditionally for low-income people, but the latest iteration serves online shoppers who may simply have a distrust of credit, a remnant of the 2008 financial crisis. (Consumer advocates have said the potential risks of the nascent service are not yet fully understood.) The industry has benefited from the pandemic boom in e-commerce, and could cover as much as $1 trillion in payment volume in a few years. Other players in the fast-growing sector include Affirm, Klarna, QuadPay and Sezzle.
Square also reported its second-quarter earnings on Sunday and said it had $4.7 billion in revenue in the quarter, more than double the total from a year earlier. Its share price has risen more than 80 percent this year.
The deal between Square and Afterpay requires shareholder and regulatory approval. Another big fintech deal, the $5.3 billion takeover of Plaid by Visa, was called off in January after the Justice Department sued to block it, and the Biden administration has pledged to take a tough stance on corporate consolidation. When asked about potential antitrust concerns, Amrita Ahuja, Square’s chief financial officer, said the “buy now, pay later” industry was still “highly competitive.”
Monday
Chinese business ban: A U.S. ban on investing in 59 Chinese firms with ties to China’s military or surveillance industries is set to take effect. The order complicates the firms’ ties with U.S. companies. China Mobile, included in the ban, has been bringing iPhones to Chinese customers since 2014.
Tuesday
Lyft earnings: The ride-hailing company will publish its financial results for the three months ending in June. The report comes as drivers have demanded better wages and work conditions.
Auto earnings: BMW and the auto start-up Nikola will publish their financial reports. Last week, Nikola’s former chief executive, Trevor Milton, was charged by federal prosecutors with making “false and misleading statements regarding Nikola’s product and technology.”
BP earnings: Investors will see volatility in oil prices has affected the company’s revenue.
Wednesday
G.M. earnings: Analysts will be watching for how the global chip shortage is affecting General Motors. G.M. and other auto companies have been forced to halt or slow production for some of their vehicles.
Uber earnings: The ride-hailing giant has famously operated in the red. Will its booming food-delivery business help it eke out a profit?
Thursday
Bank of England sets rates: Britain’s central bank is expected to add negative interest rates as a policy option after asking banks to prepare for below-zero rates. Most analysts will be looking for clues in new forecasts of inflation and economic growth about how soon the central bank will raise interest rates after its bond-buying programs ends this year.
Friday
Jobs report: Data from the Labor Department will show whether a hiring burst in June continued in July. Economists will learn whether the reopening of the U.S. economy is drawing back the millions of workers who left the labor force during the pandemic.
The S&P 500 was mostly unchanged in midday trading on Monday. Despite a volatile stretch last week, the index ended July up 2.3 percent, its sixth consecutive month of gains. The Nasdaq composite ticked up 0.4 percent on Monday.
Markets in Europe rose slightly, with the Stoxx Europe 600 closing 0.6 percent higher, and Asian markets were also higher.
Oil prices fell, with West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. crude benchmark, dipping about 4 percent to $70.82 a barrel.
Square rose more than 11 after saying on Sunday that it planned to acquire the Australian “buy now, pay later” company Afterpay in an all-stock deal that values Afterpay at about $29 billion. Shares of Affirm, another installment loan company, jumped almost 15 percent.
Advertisement
Some Federal Reserve officials are worrying that the housing boom could end up looking like a bubble, one that threatens financial stability, and that the central bank’s big bond purchases could be helping to inflate it.
Policymakers don’t need to look far to see escalating prices, because housing is growing more expensive nearly everywhere, The New York Times’s Jeanna Smialek reports. Buying a typical home in Boise, Idaho, cost about $469,000 in June, up from $335,000 a year ago, based on Zillow estimates of local housing values. A typical house in Boone, N.C., is worth $362,000, up from $269,000. Prices nationally have risen 15 percent over the past year, Zillow’s data shows, in line with the closely watched S&P CoreLogic Case-Shiller index of home prices, which rose a record 16.6 percent in the year through May.
“It’s making me nervous that you’ve got this incipient housing bubble, with anecdotal reports backed up by a lot of the data,” James Bullard, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, said during a call with reporters on Friday. He doesn’t think things are at crisis levels yet, but he says the Fed should avoid feeding the situation further.
Industry experts say the boom emerged from a cocktail of low interest rates, booming demand and supply bottlenecks. It’s a situation that many are feeling acutely with no single policy to blame and no easy fix.
Fed officials face a particularly tricky calculus when it comes to housing.
Their policies definitely help to drive demand. Bond-buying and low Fed interest rates make mortgages cheaper, inspiring people to borrow more and buy bigger. But rates aren’t the sole factor behind the home price surge. There are also demographics, a pandemic-spurred desire for space, and a very limited supply of homes for sale — factors outside the central bank’s control.
YouTube has suspended the conservative news channel Sky News Australia for a week for breaching the platform’s coronavirus misinformation policy.
The broadcaster, which is owned by Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation and has nearly two million subscribers on YouTube, is not allowed to upload new videos for the duration of its suspension, which began on Thursday. Existing videos on its account can still be viewed.
In a statement to The New York Times on Monday, YouTube said it had removed Sky News videos and issued a strike against the broadcaster in accordance with policies “to prevent the spread of coronavirus information that could cause real-world harm.”
This is the first strike for Sky News. If it receives three strikes within 90 days, its YouTube channel will be permanently deleted.
The statement did not specify what content was removed.
Sky News said in a statement on its website on Sunday that the suspension had resulted from “a review of old videos published to the channel,” and that it “acknowledges YouTube’s right to enforce its policies.”
An opinion piece published by Sky News on Sunday criticized the suspension as an “assault on freedom of thought” and said that some of the removed videos had featured debates over the efficacy of masks and lockdowns.
Lockdowns have been a contentious topic in Australia, where two of the largest cities are under stay-at-home orders amid growing clusters of the more contagious Delta variant of the virus. Brisbane began a three-day lockdown on Saturday after six cases were discovered, and on Monday it was extended until Sunday. In Sydney, where an outbreak of the Delta variant has grown to more than 3,500 cases, 300 soldiers are patrolling the streets to enforce a lockdown that is in its sixth week.
Officials say the lockdowns are necessary because not enough Australians have been inoculated against Covid-19. Only 15 percent of the population is fully vaccinated, according to a New York Times database.
The Sky News suspension came on the same day it was reported that The Daily Telegraph, a Sydney tabloid that is also owned by News Corporation, had dropped a weekly column by the Sky News commentator Alan Jones.
In a segment on his Sky News show last month, Mr. Jones and Craig Kelly, an Australian lawmaker and conspiracy theorist, falsely claimed that the Delta variant was less deadly than the original form of the coronavirus and that people who had been vaccinated were more likely to die from the virus. Sky News subsequently retracted the segment and issued a correction.
A last-minute lobbying push by the cryptocurrency industry to change language in the bipartisan infrastructure bill that was finalized over the weekend succeeded in scaling back some of the scrutiny that participants in the sector will face from the I.R.S.
The final legislative text included some changes to alleviate concerns of the cryptocurrency industry, which expressed alarm last week about new requirements that would define most of the participants in the sector as brokers and force them to turn over information to the I.R.S. The provision was projected to raise $28 billion over a decade.
After receiving pushback from cryptocurrency lobbyists, lawmakers revised that section of the bill to “clarify” the definition of a broker rather than expand upon it.
The legislation also removed language that explicitly targeted “any decentralized exchange or peer-to-peer marketplace.” It replaced that with a broader definition that characterizes brokers as anyone “responsible for regularly providing any service effectuating transfers of digital assets on behalf of another person.”
The cryptocurrency industry has been adamant that the tougher tax enforcement should not apply to miners, or creators, of digital money, or the “node operators” that keep the software behind transactions moving.
Lobbyists were continuing to press senators for greater clarity to ensure that those parts of the nascent sector would be excluded from the law. They believe that they have assurances from top lawmakers, such as Senator Rob Portman, Republican of Ohio, about the intent of the law, but they are still seeking similar assurances from the Treasury Department, which will have broad discretion to implement the law if it is passed and signed by President Biden."
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "The Commerce Department said Wednesday that — despite more than two years of President Trump’s “America First” policies — the United States last year posted a $891.2 billion merchandise trade deficit, the largest in the nation’s 243-year history.
The trade gap with China also hit a record $419 billion, underscoring the stakes for the president’s bid to reach a deal with Chinese President Xi Jinping as soon as this month.
The department’s final 2018 trade report, which was delayed by the partial government shutdown, showed that the United States bought far more in foreign goods than it sold to customers in Africa, Asia, Europe and North America. The shortfall topped the 2006 record of $838.3 billion, set as the housing bubble was peaking, and marked the third consecutive year of rising deficits.
A broader measure of the nation’s trade performance, which includes the services sector, showed a $621 billion deficit. That reflected a deterioration of more than $100 billion from the figure Trump inherited from president Barack Obama.
[Trump’s trade war has started. Who’s been helped and who’s been hurt?]
It has been evident for months that Trump was not shrinking a trade gap that he calls “unsustainable” and that he says represents a major transfer of wealth from Americans to foreigners. Over the past year, even as he imposed tariffs on foreign-made solar panels, washing machines, steel, aluminum and assorted goods from China, imports roared ahead of exports.
The president thus begins his reelection drive with a core campaign promise unfulfilled — and with a recent flurry of economic research showing that his embrace of tariffs is damaging the U.S. economy.
Economists say the trade deficit is swelling because of broad economic forces, including a chronic shortfall in national savings that was exacerbated by last year’s $1.5 trillion corporate and personal income tax cut. As cash-flush businesses and consumers increased their spending, purchases of imported goods rose while the overvalued dollar weighed on exports.
“Macroeconomics end up ruling. You can’t wish it away. You can’t tariff it away,” said William Reinsch, a former Commerce Department official now at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
The Commerce Department report comes amid indications that negotiations with China over a broad trade agreement may be in their final weeks. China has offered to buy a reported $1.2 trillion in additional American products over the next six years in a deal that reportedly would ease each side’s tariffs, usher in changes to Beijing’s state-led economic model and include tough new enforcement mechanisms.
But most economists say that such increased Chinese purchases probably would only divert U.S. shipments from other foreign customers, shrinking the trade gap with China but leaving the global balance largely unchanged. With the economy at or close to full employment, U.S. farms and factories have a limited ability to sharply increase output to meet a sudden increase in Chinese orders.
“That reality is not going to change,” said economist Matthew J. Slaughter, dean of the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth College.
Any deal with China would mark a milestone in Trump’s tariff war, although not its end. The Commerce Department on Monday began investigating whether imports of titanium sponges, used in chemical plants and military hardware, represent a national security threat.
The president has used similar studies to impose tariffs on steel and aluminum and has threatened to apply them to imported cars and car parts.
Trump persists with the import levies even as some supporters also push for him to act on other forces fueling the trade deficit, including a robust dollar.
The dollar is now valued 19 percent above its 10-year average against the currencies of major U.S. trading partners, according to Federal Reserve data.
The high dollar acts as a price increase for American exporters, making it harder to compete with foreign rivals.
“A competitive dollar is the most important tool we have to spur economic growth and job creation in the U.S. economy,” said Michael Stumo, chief executive of the Coalition for a Prosperous America.
[China has a big weapon that it hasn’t used in the trade war — yet. Tourists.]
The United States typically runs a sizable surplus in its global services trade, which includes spending by foreign tourists and students, financial services and consulting, partly offsetting the larger goods gap.
The best chance of the trade deficit shrinking anytime soon would require an economic downturn that no one wants. In 2009, amid the Great Recession, the trade deficit fell 40 percent from the peak three years earlier, to about $506 billion.
“If you want to lower the trade deficit, have a recession,” Reinsch said.
Trump has long been convinced that the United States gets a raw deal from its trade ties. As a New York real estate magnate in the 1980s, he routinely complained about Japanese auto companies and investors who bought iconic American properties such as Rockefeller Center and California’s Pebble Beach.
In a 2016 campaign speech in Pennsylvania, Trump called the trade deficit a “politician-made disaster” and promised swift change. “We can turn it all around — and we can turn it around fast,” he said.
Trump has used tariffs and import taxes more aggressively than any American president since the 1930s. In a March 2 speech at the Conservative Political Action Conference , he called them “the greatest negotiating tool in the history of our country” and credited them with bringing trade partners such as China to the bargaining table.
The president has negotiated new agreements with South Korea and North American neighbors Canada and Mexico, and he appears close to a deal with China. But it’s too soon to say what effect those agreements will have on the deficit.
Changes in U.S. tariffs called for in the South Korean deal took effect only on Jan. 1, while Congress has yet to act on the new North American agreement.
Still, tariffs have proved to be a blunt weapon. The president often boasts about how much money the U.S. government is reaping from tariffs.
“Billions of dollars, right now, are pouring into our Treasury,” he told the Conservative Political Action Conference on March 2, adding that Chinese exporters are absorbing almost the entire burden of the tariffs.
But a pair of new studies concludes that he is wrong. “When we impose a tariff, it is the domestic consumers and purchasers of imports that bear the full cost of the tariffs,” said David Weinstein, an economics professor at Columbia University, who co-wrote one of the papers.
Weinstein said the president appears to be relying on a 2018 analysis of data from the 1990s, when the United States represented a larger share of the global economy and had more leverage over exporters in other countries.
Weinstein’s study, co-written with Mary Amiti of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Princeton University’s Stephen J. Redding, reviewed what actually occurred last year after U.S. tariffs took effect. It concluded that Americans paid the entire tariff bill.
A second study — by four economists from the University of California at Los Angeles, Yale University, the University of California at Berkeley and Columbia University — reached the same conclusion.
That study also found that workers in Republican-leaning counties, especially in farm states, suffered the greatest losses from tariffs that U.S. trading partners imposed in retaliation for the president’s actions.
Trump’s tariffs also may cause U.S. companies to write off sizable investments in their Chinese factories as they scramble to shift operations to safer venues, said the study by Weinstein, Amiti and Redding. If the tariffs continue, about $165 billion worth of trade would be redirected each year, they added.
The study also found sizable costs relative to any expected benefits. If the tariffs led to the creation of 35,000 new manufacturing jobs — equal to all the steel and aluminum jobs lost in the past decade — they would cost $195,000 per job, the study found.
“The costs of the trade war are quite large relative to optimistic estimates of any gains that are likely to be achieved,” the three economists wrote."
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "President Biden’s mantra for his ambitious $1.8 trillion American Families Plan could be: Go big or go home.

It’s a wish list of economic help for low- and middle-income families:

· Two years of free community college for all.

· An increase in Pell grants for low-income students of up to $1,400. And tuition subsidies for lower-income students who attend historically Black colleges and universities, tribal colleges or minority-serving institutions.

· A promise that low- and middle-income families will pay no more than 7 percent of their income for child care for children 5 and under.

· A push for a permanent increase in the child and dependent care tax credit — up to $4,000 to cover expenses related to care for a child under 13 or a dependent with a disability who needs care, and up to $8,000 for two or more qualifying individuals.

· Extending until 2025 the increases in the child tax credit in the American Rescue Plan — $3,600 for children under 6 and $3,000 for those older than 6.

· Providing up to 12 weeks of paid family and medical leave phased in over 10 years.

· Lowering health-care premiums for millions of Americans who buy their health coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

I want to believe change is coming. But we’ve been here before. Grand plans made, then broken or stymied by a horribly partisan political system in which all too often policies favoring major corporations and special-interest groups trump the needs of the many.

President Donald Trump made all kinds of promises about helping struggling Americans, too, in his first address to a joint session of Congress. Many of his plans were thwarted by the pandemic and a Congress so divided that members might struggle to agree the sky is blue on a sunny day.

Biden certainly said all the right things — about the need to increase the minimum wage and create jobs that could give people “a little breathing room.” But frankly, I’m concerned legislators are willing only to drop financial breadcrumbs to low- and middle-income households when an economic crisis hits.

Even at the depths of this coronavirus recession, many Senate Republicans were reluctant to endorse a big stimulus program — although it had Trump’s backing.

We need long-term financial relief for people left further behind because of the pandemic. Realistically, Biden’s got a short time before the next election cycle might take away the slight legislative leverage the Democrats wield in Congress.

But the costs of inaction will further widen the economic divide. A recent Washington Post-ABC News poll found that a quarter of women say their family’s financial situation is worse today than before the coronavirus-related shutdowns.

Yes, the three rounds of stimulus payments made a huge difference, but just for a few weeks or months. When will we stop trying to solve systemic economic problems for low- and middle-income families with relief money that is given only begrudgingly — and then only because the powers that be fear it will upset Wall Street if they don’t.

My Post colleague Allan Sloan wrote at the end of last year, “I think that many of the problems in our country stem from the division between the kind of people who benefit from government policies that support financial markets and stock prices, and the people short on financial assets who are left on their own to try to make a decent living and provide for their families at a time when inflation-adjusted wages have been eroding.”

The Biden administration and many congressional Democrats want to increase the hourly minimum wage from a measly $7.25 to $15 an hour.

It’s a popular proposal.

Sixty-two percent of U.S. adults favor raising the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour, according to a Pew Research Center survey in early April. But there are sharp partisan differences, Pew said.

“Let’s raise the minimum wage to $15,” Biden said in his speech Wednesday night. “... No one working 40 hours a week should live below the poverty line.”

At one point, Biden challenged the theory that if you lower the tax rate for corporations and the rich, they will, in turn, make moves that will stimulate the economy and ultimately help low- and middle-income America.

“Trickle-down economics has never worked,” Biden said, “and it’s time to grow the economy from the bottom and the middle out.”

He’s right. As The Post reported last year, a compensation study looking at data spanning 50 years and 18 countries found that tax cuts for the rich simply enrich them.

“We find that major reforms reducing taxes on the rich lead to higher income inequality,” said a London School of Economics and Political Science working paper by David Hope and Julian Limberg, adding, “Lower taxes on the rich encourage high earners to bargain more forcefully to increase their own compensation, at the direct expense of those lower down the income distribution.”

As I listened to Biden, I felt encouraged for the millions of Americans who feel financially lost. His agenda for these struggling families is bold. But delivering on his promises will take a political miracle."
econ_change of article is: same
###
article: "Big Tech Earnings Surge as Economy Slumps: Live Updates
The percentage decrease in G.D.P.
is by far the biggest on record.
+
4
%
+
2
0
–
2
–
4
–
6
–9.5%
Percentage change from previous quarter
–
8
–
10
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
The percentage decrease in G.D.P. is by far the biggest on record.
+
4
%
+
2
0
–
2
–
4
–
6
–9.5%
Percentage change from previous quarter
–
8
–
10
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
The percentage decrease in G.D.P. is by far the biggest on record.
+
4
%
+
2
0
–
2
–
4
–
6
Percentage change from previous quarter
–9.5%
–
8
–
10
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook, displayed the social network’s enormous financial clout on Thursday, even as the company has dealt with regulatory scrutiny and advertiser boycotts.
Facebook’s revenue for the second quarter rose 11 percent from a year earlier to $18.7 billion, while profit jumped 98 percent to $5.2 billion. The results were well above analysts’ estimates of $17.3 billion in revenue with a profit of $3.9 billion, according to data provided by FactSet.
More than three billion people come to Facebook or one of its family of apps on a regular basis, as the services have overtaken much of the developed world. And some 2.47 billion people use one or more of Facebook’s apps every day.
The company said its number of monthly active users rose 12 percent from a year ago and added that it was seeing record levels of engagement and usage this year because of the coronavirus pandemic and the shelter-in-place orders around the world.
“We’re glad to be able to provide small businesses the tools they need to grow and be successful online during these challenging times,” said Mr. Zuckerberg, who was grilled by lawmakers on Wednesday over Facebook’s power. “And we’re proud that people can rely on our services to stay connected when they can’t always be together in person.”
Facebook’s earnings have long been a bright spot for the Silicon Valley company. Despite increasing scrutiny from regulators, questions about its role in subverting elections and how people use the platform to spread misinformation, users have continued coming back to its services. Because of this, advertisers have consistently spent money on the platform.
But that started changing in late June when a grass-roots campaign, Stop Hate For Profit, rallied many of the top advertisers on Facebook to pull back their spending because of issues of hate speech on the site. Facebook has tried to assuage the concerns, but has made it clear that it will not change its policy about free speech on the site based on outside threats to the business.
Facebook cautioned investors on Thursday that fallout from the ad boycott was noticeable in July. The company warned that greater economic turmoil from the pandemic could also eventually affect its bottom line.
Buoyed by a pandemic-induced surge in online shopping, Amazon on Thursday reported record sales and profits in the latest quarter.
Amazon had $88.9 billion in quarterly sales, up 40 percent from a year earlier. Profit doubled, to $5.2 billion, even though the company invested heavily to improve the safety in Amazon’s warehouses.
Analysts expected the company to have $81.4 billion in sales and $665 million in profit, according estimates compiled by FactSet, a financial data firm. Shares in the company jumped more than 6 percent in after-hours trading.
“Simply put, Covid-19, in our view, has injected Amazon with a growth hormone,” Tom Forte, an analyst at the investment bank D.A. Davidson & Company, wrote in a recent note to investors.
The profit came even as Amazon invested $9 billion in expanding warehouses and other capital expenditures to increase its capacity. “It’s a good problem to have,” Brian Olsavsky, the company’s finance chief, said on a call with reporters.
In April, Jeff Bezos, Amazon’s chief executive, told investors to expect no operating profit, and maybe even a loss, as the company planned to spend about $4 billion on coronavirus-related expenses, including temporary pay increases, declines in warehouse efficiency because of social distancing and $300 million for testing its work force for the virus.
“If you’re a shareowner in Amazon, you may want to take a seat, because we’re not thinking small,” he said at the time.
Amazon had been paying workers an extra $2 an hour, but that benefit expired in May. At the end of June, it announced one-time “thank you” bonus of $500 for full-time associates in its warehouses.
But even those costs did not compare to the immense surge in demand, with online retail sales up 48 percent. As Americans have stayed home during the virus, they have flocked to online shopping.
“E-commerce is off the charts right now,” said Guru Hariharan, a former Amazon employee whose company, CommerceIQ, helps major consumer brands manager their Amazon business. The initial shock of panic buying has subsided, but “demand is starting to stabilize, at a much higher level,” he said. Mr. Olsavsky said customers returned to buying more profitable products, like clothing, versus lower-margin groceries and cleaning suppliers.
One of the biggest challenges Amazon had expected was keeping up with demand, as the virus flared among its workers and the communities where they live. Mr. Olsavsky said the company was able to fulfill more orders than it had previously expected. The number of products it sold grew 57 percent, but the number of employees it had was up just 34 percent.
On the call with reporters, Amazon declined to say if it would be paying its warehouse workers more in the current quarter. It said that pandemic-related expenses would fall to $2 billion in the quarter.
Sales at Amazon’s lucrative cloud computing business, whose customers range from major corporations to start-ups, grew 29 percent, to $10.8 billion, falling short of analyst expectations, though it was more profitable than they expected.
Advertisement
Alphabet, the parent company of Google, reported its first-ever decline in quarterly revenue on Thursday, hurt by a slowdown in spending by advertisers.
Alphabet said its revenue fell 2 percent to $38.3 billion in the second quarter compared with a year ago. The decline came largely from lower sales of advertisements that run alongside its search results because of the coronavirus pandemic, although the company posted an increase in revenue from YouTube ads and its cloud-computing business.
The results were the first time that quarterly revenue had declined in its 17 years as a publicly traded company, but Alphabet exceeded analysts’ expectations for revenue and profit. Net profit totaled $6.96 billion, down 30 percent from a year ago.
Ford Motor said Thursday it earned $1.1 billion in the second quarter as a large one-time gain in the value of its investment in an autonomous driving company more than offset losses in its main business.
Without the gain, from its stake in Argo AI, Ford lost $1.9 billion excluding interest and taxes. The result was better than Ford’s earlier forecast of a pretax loss of $5 billion.
The coronavirus pandemic forced Ford and other automakers to close factories for nearly two months starting in March. On Wednesday, General Motors said it lost $758 million in the second quarter.
Ford said in a statement that it expected “no further significant coronavirus-related disruptions to production” in the second half of the year. But the company also said it was not expecting “meaningful change in the current economic conditions.”
The automaker forecast that it would earn $500 million to $1.5 billion on a pretax basis in the third quarter, amid weaker demand for new vehicles, parts and services.
Ford’s deliveries of new vehicles fell by half to 645,000 in the second quarter largely because of the pandemic. Its auto operations lost money in every region in the world, including a $954 million setback in North America.
The company used up $5.3 billion in cash in the quarter, but said it still has $39 billion on hand at the end of June.
Ford recorded a gain of $3.5 billion from a transaction related to an alliance it formed with Volkswagen, which bought a stake in Argo AI.
From April through June, millions of people lost their jobs, thousands of businesses closed — and Apple made a further $11.25 billion in profits.
A global economic slowdown in the second quarter did not faze one of the world’s richest and most resilient companies, as people kept buying Apple devices en masse and paid the tech giant billions of dollars more for apps and services on those gadgets.
Apple said its sales rose 11 percent to $59.7 billion and its profits increased 12 percent to $11.25 billion. Both figures handily beat analysts’ expectations, with Wall Street having forecast declines in both areas.
Revenue rose for all of Apple’s product categories and in all of its geographic areas, unusual success even by Apple’s lofty standards.
Sales were particularly strong for iPads and Mac computers, as the public was increasingly forced to work and socialize virtually because of the pandemic. Revenue also surged in its internet-services business, which includes Apple’s cut of sales from the App Store, the subject of antitrust investigations in the United States and Europe. Even the iPhone, which remains the company’s biggest seller, notched a slight increase in sales for only the second time in the past seven quarters.
Luca Maestri, Apple’s finance chief, said in an interview that the shift to working and learning from home had led more people to splurge on Apple’s devices. “Our products and services are very relevant to our customers’ lives, and in some cases, even more during the pandemic than ever before,” he said.
But while the pandemic has further entrenched the biggest tech companies’ power, Mr. Maestri disputed the idea that it had been good for business, saying the quarter would have been even stronger without it. “We believe we’ve lost several billion dollars because of the pandemic,” he said.
Investors have flocked to Apple’s shares as a safe haven from an economic recession, pushing its stock price up about 30 percent this year to a roughly $1.67 trillion value.
Advertisement
Economic output fell at its fastest pace on record last spring as the coronavirus pandemic forced businesses across the United States to close their doors and kept millions of Americans shut in their homes for weeks.
Gross domestic product — the broadest measure of goods and services produced — fell 9.5 percent in the second quarter of the year, the Commerce Department said Thursday. On an annualized basis, the standard way of reporting quarterly economic data, G.D.P. fell at a rate of 32.9 percent.
G.D.P. shrank $1.8 trillion in the 2nd quarter.
$20
trillion
18
$17.2
trillion
16
14
12
Gross domestic product, adjusted for
inflation and seasonality, at annual rates
10
’04
’06
’08
’10
’12
’14
’16
’18
’20
G.D.P. shrank $1.8 trillion in the second quarter.
$20
trillion
18
$17.2
trillion
16
14
12
Gross domestic product, adjusted for inflation and seasonality, at annual rates
10
’04
’06
’08
’10
’12
’14
’16
’18
’20
The collapse was unprecedented in its speed and breathtaking in its severity. The only possible comparisons in modern American history came during the Great Depression and the demobilization after World War II, both of which occurred before the advent of modern economic statistics.
Unlike past recessions, this one was a result of a conscious decision to suspend economic activity to slow the spread of the virus. Congress pumped trillions of dollars into the economy to sustain households and businesses, limit long-term damage and allow for a rapid rebound.
The plan worked at first. In recent weeks, however, cases have surged in much of the country. Data from public and private sources indicate a pullback in economic activity, reflecting consumer unease and renewed shutdowns.
“In another world, a sharp drop in activity would have been just a good, necessary blip while we addressed the virus,” said Heather Boushey, president of the Washington Center for Equitable Growth, a progressive think tank. “From where we sit in July, we know that this wasn’t just a short-term blip.”
The number of Americans filing new claims for state unemployment benefits totaled 1.43 million last week, the Labor Department reported Thursday.
It was the 19th straight week that the tally exceeded one million, an unheard-of figure before the coronavirus pandemic. And it was the second weekly increase in a row after nearly four months of declines, a sign of how the rebound in cases has undercut the economy’s nascent recovery. Claims for the previous week totaled 1.42 million.
New claims for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, the government’s program aimed at covering freelancers, the self-employed and other workers not covered by traditional unemployment benefits, totaled 830,000, down from 975,000 the week before. Those numbers, unlike the figures for state claims, are not seasonally adjusted.
Initial weekly unemployment claims,
both regular and those under the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program
6 million
5
4
3
2
1
0
Feb.
March
April
May
June
July
Initial weekly unemployment claims, both regular and those under the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program
6 million
5
4
3
2
1
0
Feb.
March
April
May
June
July
“We’re still in a desperate situation,” said Diane Swonk, chief economist at the accounting firm Grant Thornton in Chicago. Noting that weekly claims were in the 200,000 range before the pandemic brought widespread shutdowns in March, she added, “This is unique in terms of the speed and magnitude of the job losses.”
What’s more, fears are growing that after rebounding strongly in May and June, the economy has run out of steam, with many states reversing the reopening of businesses.
“Everyone wants to keep putting on rose-colored glasses, but it’s blinding us to the reality of the situation and what we have to deal with,” Ms. Swonk said.
At the same time, the $600 supplemental weekly unemployment payment from the federal government is ending, a potentially crippling financial blow to millions. Republicans have proposed replacing the supplement with a $200 weekly payment, while Democrats want to extend it in full. “We’re nowhere close to a deal,” Mark Meadows, the White House chief of staff, said Wednesday.
Consumer spending, the bedrock of the U.S. economy, plunged 10.1 percent in the second quarter, the Commerce Department reported Thursday. It was by far the biggest drop on record. But the decline wasn’t across the board — and the details help paint a picture of life in a pandemic.
Spending on services fell 13.3 percent, led by a near-total collapse in spending on restaurant meals and recreation, the department’s report on quarterly economic output noted. Health care spending fell sharply, too, as patients canceled elective procedures and delayed routine care.
Spending on goods was a different story. Overall goods expenditures fell a modest 3 percent, and some quarantine-friendly categories actually had increases. Spending on recreational vehicles and related goods rose nearly 9 percent as consumers sought ways to travel without getting on airplanes.
Other parts of the economy showed large contractions. Business investment, residential construction and trade — both imports and exports — all fell by double-digit percentages. One exception: Spending by the federal government rose 4.1 percent as Congress moved to prevent deeper economic damage. (That figure reflects only a small fraction of the government stimulus efforts, much of which are considered “transfer payments” that aren’t counted in gross domestic product.)
Advertisement
Stocks slid on Thursday as economic reports from the United States and Germany showed the toll of the coronavirus outbreak on growth, but a rally in shares of big technology companies, ahead of their earnings reports, helped minimize the blow to Wall Street.
The S&P 500 fell about half a percent, while shares in Europe were down by more than 2 percent. The Nasdaq composite climbed as Apple, Amazon, Alphabet and Facebook all rose. The largest technology companies often set the direction of the broad market because of their sheer size.
Oil prices were also lower, as were shares of energy companies. ConocoPhillips slid after the company said its earnings plunged by more than analysts had expected.
Financial stocks, closely tied to the cyclical ups and downs of the American economy, slumped too, as long-term interest rates — set by the yields on government bonds — continued to plumb some of the lowest levels in history.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury note fell to 0.55 percent on Thursday morning. Such yields help set the price of the loans banks make and significantly influence their profitability.
The U.S. economy shrank by 9.5 percent in the second quarter, while Germany’s economy shrank by 10.1 percent. On an annualized basis, the standard way of reporting quarterly economic data, U.S. gross domestic product fell at a rate of 32.9 percent, which is the sharpest drop on record.
Data released at the same time showed that 1.43 million Americans filed new state unemployment claims, the second week in which that number has risen and a figure that highlights the persistence of the economic downturn.
The grim data came a day after Jerome H. Powell, the Federal Reserve chair, told reporters that the “pace of recovery looks like it has slowed,” pointing to debit and credit card spending and hiring trends. He added, “The path forward for the economy is extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on our success in keeping the virus in check.”
— Kevin Granville and
Comcast, the largest cable operator in the U.S., reported on Thursday $23.7 billion in revenue and $7.9 billion in adjusted profit for the second quarter, beating expectations. Here are the highlights:
Peacock, its new streaming product, attracted 10 million sign-ups in its first three months. It differs from other platforms like HBO Max (which netted 4.1 million in one month) and Netflix in that it is free and relies on advertising for revenue. (There is a paid tier that features more content but still includes ads.) The strategy is reminiscent of the original broadcast system, which is also free. Comcast hopes to have 35 million users by 2024.
With most of the country under lockdown, Comcast added 323,000 more broadband customers, but it lost 477,000 pay TV subscribers. People switched to cheaper streaming alternatives as wallets tightened under the pandemic. It’s not a bad trade for Comcast, since a broadband subscriber tends to add more profit than a video one.
At NBCUniversal, the lack of sports and the shutdown of movie theaters and theme parks hurt the division. Sales fell 25 percent to $6.1 billion. Theme parks took a $399 million loss for the quarter, and the Universal Studios division saw sales decline nearly a fifth to $1.2 billion.
But a significant deal was struck this week between Universal and AMC Entertainment, the nation’s largest theater chain, that could recast the economics of the film industry. The studio can now sell movies on streaming 17 days after it runs in theaters, collapsing the usual 90-day window. Movies tend to make most of its box office dollars in the first two weekends, so the new terms appear to benefit the studio. In other words, there will be more reasons to stay home.
United Airlines warned its pilots on Thursday that it may need to expand planned furloughs if demand for flights remains deeply depressed and a vaccine is not mass produced by the end of next year. The airline previously said that it could furlough up to one third of its pilots, or 3,900 people, this year and next. “That may not prove to be enough,” an executive said in a memo to pilots.
California Pizza Kitchen filed for bankruptcy protection in Texas on Thursday. The company, which operates more than 200 locations in the United States and internationally, said it will use the restructuring process to close unprofitable locations and cut debt, and plans to emerge from bankruptcy in under three months. The company is the latest dining chain to file for Chapter 11 protection during the pandemic, following Chuck E. Cheese’s parent company, CEC Entertainment, and NPC International, the largest U.S. franchisee of Pizza Hut.
Comcast, the largest cable operator in the U.S., reported on Thursday $23.7 billion in revenue and $7.9 billion in adjusted profit for the second quarter, beating expectations. Peacock, its new streaming product, attracted 10 million sign-ups in its first three months. The company added 323,000 more broadband customers, but it lost 477,000 pay TV subscribers.
Yum Brands reported on Thursday that its same-store sales in the second quarter fell about 15 percent from a year ago (not 12 percent as was earlier reported here). The company, which runs the Pizza Hut, KFC and Taco Bell fast food chains, said nearly all of its restaurants around the world are at least partially open and sales in June had leveled off. Same-store sales in June were nearly unchanged from a year ago.
Volkswagen said on Thursday it fell into the red during the first six months of 2020 after sales plunged 23 percent compared to a year earlier. But the world’s largest carmaker said vehicle sales, which were down by more than half in May, have begun to recover.
Airbus reported a big loss for the first half and vowed to conserve cash; AstraZeneca reported a 26 percent rise in earnings for its first half as sales of new drugs beat forecasts; Credit Suisse beat expectations, thanks to a surge in trading revenue; trading also aided Shell, which reported a smaller-than-expected loss, and Total, which disclosed a surprise profit; and Nestlé announced an 18 percent rise in first-half profit but warned of slowing growth for the rest of the year."
econ_change of article is: none
###
article: "U.S. Budget Gap Tripled to record $3.1 trillion in fiscal 2020, Treasury Says
Spending soared 47% in year ended Sept. 30 as government rolled out programs to battle coronavirus and recession
WASHINGTON—The U.S. budget deficit tripled to a record $3.1 trillion in the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30 as the government battled the global coronavirus pandemic that plunged the country into a recession, has taken more than 217,000 American lives and thrown millions out of work.
As a share of economic output, the budget gap in fiscal year 2020 hit roughly 16.1%, the largest since 1945, the Treasury Department said Friday, when the country was financing massive military operations to help end World War II.
Federal debt totaled 102% of gross domestic product, the first time it has exceeded the size of the economy for the full fiscal year in more than 70 years, according to estimates from the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. That has put the U.S. in a league with Greece, Italy and Japan among the most heavily indebted nations.
Senate Republicans, citing the mounting debt, have balked at a White House proposal to spend another $1.88 trillion and House Democrats’ $2.2 trillion bill to add to aid to counter the steepest economic downturn since the Great Depression. Many economists and Federal Reserve officials argue restoring growth should be the first priority, and that worries about closing the deficit can come later.
“Unprecedented times call for unprecedented deficits,” said William Hoagland, senior vice president at the Bipartisan Policy Center, a centrist Washington think tank. “Today’s deficit figure is the result of six months of fighting the pandemic and its economic fallout.”
The International Monetary Fund this week said global public debt is likely to approach a record 100% of output but urged policy makers to maintain spending to help vulnerable groups and promote a strong recovery. The IMF said the global recession won’t be as deep as it projected earlier, thanks in part to massive deficit spending by advanced and major emerging-market economies.
“The IMF’s message from these meetings is clear: Avoid premature withdrawal—pulling the plug too soon risks serious, self-inflicted harm,” Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva told reporters Thursday as finance ministers and central bankers assembled virtually for the annual meetings of the fund and the World Bank.
To cover the budget shortfall, the Treasury has sold a flood of new securities, boosting total government debt held by the public to $21 trillion, a 25% increase from the beginning of the fiscal year.
Investors have shown scant worry about the deficit. U.S. government bonds were little changed Friday, with the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note ticking up to 0.743% from 0.730% Thursday, according to Tradeweb. Yields rose in the morning following better-than-expected retail sales data but fell after a disappointing report on industrial production.
Federal revenue totaled $3.4 trillion, Friday’s Treasury report showed, down 1% from the previous year, with much of that occurring since March, when the virus began spreading across the country. Spending rose 47% to a record $6.5 trillion as the government distributed emergency loans for small businesses, enhanced jobless benefits and stimulus payments for American households.
Unprecedented relief spending—the bulk of which was enacted in the $2.2 trillion Cares Act in March—helped keep households and businesses afloat during the early months of the downturn, boosting incomes and bolstering consumer demand. With more than 10 million people still out of work, however, there are signs that the recovery’s momentum is slowing as federal aid programs expire.
There is little evidence the U.S. is approaching the limit of its ability to borrow. Investors are eager to keep buying Treasury debt that is considered to be ultra-safe, holding interest rates near historic lows, and inflation has barely budged. That has translated to lower debt-servicing costs for the government, which declined 9% last year from a year earlier, the Treasury said.
“There’s no sign of alarming pressure from these deficits anywhere in our economy,” said Wendy Edelberg, director of the Brookings Institution’s Hamilton Project and a former Congressional Budget Office chief economist. “We don’t see the pressure in interest rates, we don’t see the pressure in inflation expectations.”
Deficits typically widen during economic downturns, but they have been climbing in the U.S. for the past five years, despite sturdy economic growth. The annual budget gap was on track to exceed $1 trillion this year even before the pandemic, following Republican tax cuts enacted in 2017 that constrained revenues and two bipartisan budget deals that boosted spending.
Up until March, when the pandemic began to spread widely across the country and widespread lockdowns began, the budget gap for 2020 largely mirrored the shortfall during the same period of 2019. Federal spending from October through March was up 6.8%, while revenues rose 6.4%, Treasury officials said.
By contrast, from April through September, spending was nearly twice as high as it was during the same six-month period a year earlier, and receipts plunged 7.1%. That caused the deficit to climb 715% in the second half of the year, compared with the same period of 2019, Treasury officials said.
Much of the spending increase can be tied to efforts to mitigate the economic downturn that resulted from the pandemic, officials said. Spending by the Small Business Administration, which administered the Paycheck Protection Program for small businesses, totaled $577 billion, up from $456 million a year earlier. Spending by the Labor Department, which administers unemployment benefits, jumped to $477 billion in 2020 from $36.4 billion in fiscal 2019.
Spending for other safety-net programs, including Medicaid, Social Security and nutrition assistance, also climbed, along with outlays for new programs such as the coronavirus relief fund for cities and states and one-time $1,200 stimulus payments to households.
During the first half of fiscal 2020, federal receipts rose, as a strong economy and low unemployment boosted corporate and individual tax revenues. From April through September, however, receipts declined as the virus brought economic activity to a standstill, businesses shut down and more than 20 million workers lost their jobs.
Individual income and payroll taxes fell 7% in the second half of the year, while gross corporate tax receipts declined 15%, in part due to measures Congress enacted to help reduce taxes this year for businesses facing revenue losses, Treasury officials said.
Corrections & Amplifications
William Hoagland is senior vice president at the Bipartisan Policy Center. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said he was a senior fellow. (Corrected on Oct. 16)
Write to Kate Davidson at kate.davidson@wsj.com
Copyright ©2020 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
Appeared in the October 17, 2020, print edition as 'U.S. Budget Deficit Tripled In 2020.'"
econ_change of article is: none
###
article: "On the campaign trail, Donald J. Trump has promised to do quite a few things that are beyond the powers of an American president, like billing Mexico for a border wall. But when it comes to foreign trade, his powers as president would come closer to his expansive ambitions.
As president, Mr. Trump could seek to penalize other nations for undercutting American manufacturers or stealing American ideas. He could also pursue congressional legislation to impose a 45 percent tariff, or tax, on imported Chinese goods, as he has proposed.
The bottom line, some experts say, is that Mr. Trump might well be able to squeeze China.
That does not mean, however, that his punitive approach would ease America’s economic pains. In fact, a range of experts agree that Mr. Trump’s proposals are more likely to deepen those problems, particularly if China or other targeted nations retaliate, rather than accept his demands.
Starting a trade war might be cathartic for workers who have lost jobs, but it is unlikely to create a lot of factory work.
“There’s no way a tariff of this kind could deliver the kind of benefits that he’s talking about, and it’s quite wrong to think that the big problem for American workers has been foreign trade,” said J.W. Mason, a professor of economics at John Jay College and a fellow at the Roosevelt Institute, a liberal think tank. “But I think it could be very destructive for the rest of the world.”
Mr. Trump’s views on trade are among his oldest and steadiest public policy positions. He has long maintained that other countries are taking advantage of the United States because Americans spend more money on foreign goods than the rest of the world spends on American goods. And he has long argued for slapping higher tariffs on those foreign goods in order to fortify the American economy.
Trade was the first policy issue Mr. Trump mentioned last Tuesday in a speech after his latest round of victories in five northeastern primaries.Continue reading the main story
“Our jobs are being sucked away from our country and we’re not going to let it happen anymore, folks,” he said at a victory party in New York that night.
It emerged again Wednesday in Washington during what was billed as a major foreign policy speech.
This Tuesday, Mr. Trump hopes to sweep the delegates in Indiana and all but sew up the Republican nomination. Nowhere has trade figured more centrally than in the Hoosier State, where the air conditioner maker Carrier opted to move operations to Mexico, becoming a recurrent feature in Mr. Trump’s anti-free-trade litanies.
China has prospered over the last few decades by focusing its economy on low-cost manufacturing for foreign markets. Exports to the United States soared, particularly after China joined the World Trade Organization in 2001. American businesses and consumers bought $481.9 billion in Chinese goods in 2015, about one-fifth of all imports and the most from any country. But manufacturing employment in the United States has fallen sharply. A 2013 study estimated that China’s rise had eliminated at least one million domestic factory jobs.
In the current campaign, Mr. Trump has proposed a 45 percent tax on Chinese imports and a 35 percent tax on Mexican imports. He has also proposed tariffs on goods that specific American companies produce in foreign countries, including Carrier air-conditioners and Ford automobiles.
Mr. Trump has said the threat of such tariffs would persuade China, for example, to modify the economic policies that he describes as providing unfair advantages to Chinese companies. Rather than incur his wrath, he says, American companies would be persuaded to keep more of their factories close to home.
“The 45 percent is a threat that if they don’t behave,” Mr. Trump said at a Republican debate in Miami last month, the United States “will tax you.”
He added: “It doesn’t have to be 45; it could be less. But it has to be something because our country and our trade and our deals and most importantly our jobs are going to hell.”
As president, Mr. Trump would have some latitude to reverse a course that the nation has pursued for decades. But the results could be troublesome on multiple fronts. The removal of trade barriers has played a significant role in reducing global poverty and encouraging peace between nations, achievements that could be eroded by tit-for-tat backsliding.
“The basic principle is that a sovereign state enters trade agreements of its free will, and it can get back out,” said Robert Howse, the Lloyd C. Nelson professor of international law at N.Y.U. School of Law. “But that’s the easy part.”
Imposing sweeping tariffs would reverse a mainstay of United States foreign policy. Beginning after World War II, the United States gradually reduced its import taxes and pushed other nations to do the same, seeking not only to promote increased trade but to prevent conflict. The United States now imposes average weighted import tariffs of just 1.4 percent, according to the World Bank, among the lowest rates in the world.
Under existing laws, Mr. Trump could impose tariffs only on specific categories of imports, not whole countries, and only by demonstrating specific violations of trade rules, such as export subsidies. “There are at least 50 sets of laws and regulations that exist that China has, at least in spirit, crossed the boundaries,” Sam Clovis, an adviser to Mr. Trump, said in an interview.
But Mr. Trump would have the difficult task of proving that China is breaking the rules before the World Trade Organization, which polices global commerce. International trade laws limit the type of help governments can provide to companies, but the role of the Chinese government is particularly opaque, said Mark Wu, a professor of law at Harvard and a former United States trade negotiator in the administration of President George W. Bush.
“China’s economy is its own beast, and it has a form that was not envisioned at the time these rules were created 20 years ago,” Mr. Wu said. “W.T.O. rules are not necessarily equipped to address all of the problematic aspects of that China Inc. system as far as American exporters are concerned.”
In fact, one of Mr. Trump’s favorite charges, that China and other nations are suppressing the value of their currencies, is actually not a violation of existing trade agreements.
A central problem is defining currency manipulation in a way that excludes the United States — in particular, the Federal Reserve’s post-recession stimulus campaign, which had the effect of weakening the dollar much in the same way that other countries do to their currency.
Alternatively, Mr. Trump could pursue the radical option of seeking legislation to impose a broad China tariff, in effect demolishing the rules of global trade.
“It would be a flagrant violation,” said Alan O. Sykes, a professor of law at Stanford and an expert on international economic relations. “There is no prior violation of W.T.O. law that would be even close.”
The impact of such legislation would touch almost every aisle at Walmart.
in 2015, Americans bought $14.2 billion worth of Chinese shoes, $2.5 billion of Chinese jewelry and $593 million of Chinese rugs. And, most of all, cellphones — $64 billion worth, according to the Commerce Department.
All told, the United States imported $481.9 billion in Chinese goods in 2015, a record.
But research suggests that the price of Chinese goods would rise by significantly less than 45 percent because companies would hold the line to preserve their market share. Consumers can also buy comparable goods. When the United States imposed a 35 percent tariff on Chinese tires in 2009, imports of tires from China declined while imports from Indonesia, Mexico and Thailand rose sharply.
For the same reasons, however, economists see little chance that a tariff would achieve Mr. Trump’s goal of encouraging domestic production. They say it is even less likely to create large numbers of new factory jobs. American manufacturing output is at the highest level in history and employment has fallen because of large gains in efficiency, a trend that is unlikely to reverse.
China could retaliate by imposing its own tariffs. China responded to the tire tariff, for example, by imposing a tariff on American chicken parts.
The United States sold $116.2 billion in goods to China in 2015, including aircraft parts, automobiles and semiconductors — high-value industries in which workers earn high wages. Losing China’s market could mean sacrificing better jobs for less desirable ones.
Doug Oberhelman, chairman and chief executive of Caterpillar, described higher tariffs as “very dangerous” in February. “We’re 5 percent of the world population,” said Mr. Oberhelman, who spoke in his capacity as president of the Business Roundtable, a pro-trade lobby. “Ninety-five percent of our potential customers are elsewhere. We’ve got to learn and figure out how to deal with that.”
The damage to international trade agreements could also have deep and enduring consequences.
One of the central benefits of the current system is that it separates trade disputes from other kinds of conflict. The global effort to reduce tariffs after World War II “was dreamed up as a way to prevent world wars,” said Mr. Howse, the N.Y.U. professor. “That should not be forgotten.”Continue reading the main story"
econ_change of article is: worse
###
article: "Chinese consumers for the first time last year bought more Cadillacs than Americans did, helping drive profits at General Motors. And though the designs for those Cadillacs may have been drafted in Detroit, nearly all of the luxury automobiles were assembled in China by some of GM’s nearly 60,000 local workers.
This growing dynamic — of American companies serving Chinese consumers with products made in China — marks a shift in global trade that could pose a significant challenge to President Trump’s “America First” agenda.
Trump has based his campaign to refashion economic relations with China on the well-established notion that the country undercut American workers through low-wage manufacturing of goods exported to the United States.
That campaign entered a new chapter this week when Trump once again hiked tariffs on Chinese goods after declaring himself dissatisfied with the pace of negotiations on a new trade agreement.
But whether he succeeds in securing a trade deal, many economists and executives say, the nature of the business relationship between the United States and China already is being redefined.
After four decades of economic reform, China is morphing from a low-wage exporter into the largest consumer market for a growing number of industries, including automobiles, video games and computers.
“We’re at the end of a period of the globalization of production,” said William Overholt, a senior fellow at Harvard University’s Asia Center. “We’re at the beginning of a period of globalization of consumption in which the center of gravity moves from baby boomers in the west to the relatively young Chinese.”
[Small towns are dying everywhere but here]
A decade ago, for instance, Chinese consumers bought 71 percent of the products manufactured in China, according to the McKinsey Global Institute. Today, the Chinese buy 85 percent of what they produce — and their economy is three times larger.
By next year, China’s per-person income will have doubled since 2010, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
The phenomenon, which is also seen in other quickly developing countries like India and Indonesia, will create a new set of winners and losers.
In the United States, the principal beneficiaries of the era of globalized consumption are likely to be investors and highly skilled employees, rather than the blue-collar workers who suffered as companies moved overseas.
“It’s definitely a profits story,” said Dean Baker, senior economist at the Center for Economic and Policy Research. “It’ll have very little to do with any jobs here.”
In the past, Americans bought up the low-cost goods made in China, which was a boon for Chinese workers and also for cost-conscious Americans. But, in seeking to cater to the Chinese consumer, the reverse is not true. American companies instead are setting up factories there and in other developing markets.
Already, United States -based multinationals have been creating jobs faster in China than at home, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Since 2009, corporations have increased their Chinese workforce by 86 percent to 1.7 million — roughly four times the rate of increase at home.
For Trump, that means a trade policy that often seems to promise a return to an earlier era before globalization could disappoint, even if he secures a good deal with the Chinese.
Administration officials say they are making headway rebalancing trade relations with China and other countries to rectify mistakes made by Trump’s predecessors. A new North American trade deal, for example, requires more auto manufacturing to be done in the United States. (It still needs to be passed by Congress.) The president’s tariffs are credited with reviving steel production, one factor in the addition of 452,000 new manufacturing jobs during his tenure.
Other trends also could benefit the United States. Rising wages in countries such as China and increasing automation are making labor costs relatively less important in determining the location of new factories. That makes the U.S. more attractive as an investment destination, though rising automation means new plants require fewer American workers than the factories that closed earlier this century, vaporizing 6 million jobs.
In trade talks with Beijing, the administration also is seeking greater access to the Chinese market, which could aid U.S. export prospects. But the biggest new opportunities may do little for blue-collar workers who lost out over the past 20 years of growing U.S.-China trade ties.
U.S. negotiators are pushing the Chinese to open their markets for industries such as financial services, insurance and cloud computing. These are profitable endeavors, but ones that favor the well-educated and skilled.
The president has often portrayed a narrative of global commerce that puts the United States — not foreign markets — at the center. He calls it a “privilege” for other countries to sell into the U.S. market. And his decision to quit a 12-nation Pacific trade deal, known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership, on his fourth day in office left American companies at a disadvantage in key Asian markets at a time when developing countries are driving the growth in global demand.
Now, many executives say they do not expect the United States to reclaim its role as the globe’s dominant market.
Craig Allen, president of the U.S.-China Business Council, which represents companies such as Amazon, Goldman Sachs and Procter & Gamble, said the administration’s stance presents multinationals with a dilemma.
“A company told me today they feel some tension between what their shareholders are telling them and what the Trump administration is telling them,” said Allen, a former U.S. diplomat. “The administration is suggesting or emphasizing investment in the U.S. That’s not where the market is; that’s not where the market growth is.”
To be sure, despite consumption’s blossoming role in China’s growth, the country remains one of the world’s top exporters and enjoys a sizable merchandise trade surplus. Brad Setser, a former White House economist in the Obama administration, said talk of a new era is premature.
“This is one possible future evolution of the global economy. It isn’t necessarily the trajectory we’re already on,” he said.
The Chinese economy also has slowed from its double-digit growth pace of earlier this decade, and many business executives doubt President Xi Jinping’s commitment to further market-oriented reforms. China faces a daunting corporate debt burden that some economists warn could spark a financial crisis and delay the onset of a new economic era.
The typical Chinese individual also still earns much less than an American. In terms of purchasing power parity, which takes account of each country’s living costs, Chinese per-capita income is about $16,000, compared with roughly $60,000 in the United States.
Still, China has firmly established itself as a top opportunity — if not the top opportunity — for a wide range of American companies, including Apple, Walmart and Caterpillar. Over the past decade, per-person income in China has grown by 120 percent, compared with just 15 percent in the United States , according to Andy Rothman, an investment strategist with Matthews Asia in San Francisco.
“This is the world’s best consumer story,” Rothman said.
China’s growing prosperity is part of a broader transformation of developing countries that is affecting the volume of goods traded across borders, the design of industry supply chains and the mix between factory labor and robots.
By 2030, fast-growing developing countries led by China are expected to account for 51 percent of global consumption, nearly double their 2007 share, according to a study by McKinsey Global Institute.
Companies in the advanced economies, including the United States , the European Union and Japan, last year sold $4.5 trillion worth of goods, including machinery, chemicals and cars, to customers in poorer nations.
“This is exactly the wrong time to be putting up barriers to trade,” said Susan Lund, a McKinsey partner who directed the study.
[Companies prepare for a world of permanent tariffs]
In recent years, China accounted for more than one-third of global economic growth — roughly equal to the combined contributions of the United States, Europe and Japan, according to the International Monetary Fund.
For General Motors, that translated into deliveries of 3.65 million vehicles last year to Chinese buyers, compared with fewer than 3 million to Americans. The automaker earned $2 billion last year from its joint ventures in China.
“We posted the highest global sales mark in Cadillac’s 116-year history of 382,184 units, primarily on the strength of our performance in China,” Steve Carlisle, senior vice president of General Motors, told an investor conference last month.
U.S. multinationals that prosper overseas typically add jobs back home at their headquarters, research labs and design studios. Successful ventures like Cadillac’s generate profits that flow to the corporate bottom line, generating job-creating innovations for Americans.
But those gains tilt toward investors and better-educated workers.
“The benefit of Chinese consumers buying more Cadillacs accrue more to shareholders and very high-skilled people. You’ll see more of an unbalanced distribution of benefits,” said Sergi Lanau, deputy chief economist for the Institute of International Finance."
econ_change of article is: same
###
