###
article: "Advertisement
Supported by
‘Short Term’ Health Insurance? Up to 3 Years Under New Trump Policy
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration issued a final rule on Wednesday that clears the way for the sale of many more health insurance policies that do not comply with the Affordable Care Act and do not have to cover prescription drugs, maternity care or people with pre-existing conditions.
President Trump has said that he believes that the new “short-term, limited duration insurance” could help millions of people who do not want or need comprehensive health insurance providing the full range of benefits required by the health law.
The new plans will provide “much less expensive health care at a much lower price,” Mr. Trump said. The prices may be lower because the benefits will be fewer, and insurers do not have to cover pre-existing conditions or the people who have them.
Under the current rule, issued in late 2016 by the Obama administration, short-term insurance cannot last for more than three months, as it was meant to be a stopgap. Under the new rule, the limit would be 364 days, and insurers would be allowed, but not required, to extend policies. The maximum duration, including any extensions, would be 36 months.
The new options will help people struggling to afford coverage under the 2010 law, said James Parker, a senior adviser to Alex M. Azar II, the secretary of health and human services. But Mr. Parker added: “We make no representation that it’s equivalent coverage. These policies will not necessarily cover the same benefits or extend coverage to the same degree.”
The new rule is presented as a redefinition of “short-term, limited-duration insurance.” But it stretches the common understanding of those terms, and some of the new policies could be an attractive option for healthier consumers who now pay high prices for major medical coverage and are willing to take more risk in return for lower prices.
“Short-term is getting longer!” one insurance marketing company advised clients this week.
Democrats deride the new health plans as “junk insurance” and say consumers will discover the limits of such plans when they become sick.
Randy Pate, a senior official at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said the Trump administration expects 600,000 people to buy the new insurance policies next year, with enrollment increasing to 1.6 million by 2022.
The agency’s chief actuary, Paul Spitalnic, has estimated that premiums for short-term policies would be about half of the average premium for coverage sold in insurance exchanges under the Affordable Care Act, roughly $340 against $620 next year.
Consumer advocates, doctors, hospitals and some insurance companies expressed deep concern about the new plans, saying they would not adequately protect people who develop serious illnesses and could further destabilize insurance markets by drawing away healthy people.
People who buy the new policies and develop cancer could “face astronomical costs” and “may be forced to forgo treatment entirely because of costs,” said Chris Hansen, the president of the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network.
Stung by such criticism, Trump administration officials said they would require insurers to tell consumers exactly what is and what is not covered under the new policies.
“There are individuals today who have been priced out of coverage” because of the Affordable Care Act, Mr. Parker said. “Until we have a more comprehensive replacement for the Affordable Care Act and Obamacare, we are looking to do everything we can to take incremental steps that will make insurance coverage of any type more affordable to those who today cannot afford insurance coverage.”
The new rule takes effect in about two months. The new policies, which will be subject to state regulation, could be on sale before the end of the year. States can restrict their sale or require specific benefits, and some states have indicated that they intend to do so.
In another rule, issued only six weeks ago, the Trump administration made it easier for small businesses to band together to set up health plans that skirt many requirements of the Affordable Care Act.
Erika Sward, an assistant vice president of the American Lung Association, described the rule on short-term insurance as “one more blow of an ax to stable state marketplaces.”
In the past year, the Trump administration has also cut funds for groups that help people sign up for coverage; ended cost-sharing subsidies paid to insurers on behalf of low-income people; and asked a federal court to throw out parts of the Affordable Care Act, including the popular protections for people with pre-existing conditions.
Some insurers that lost money in the Affordable Care Act marketplace see the new short-term plans as a potentially lucrative opportunity.
The UnitedHealth Group has largely withdrawn from the Affordable Care Act marketplace, but is actively selling short-term medical plans through its Golden Rule Insurance Company.
On its website, UnitedHealth says that short-term plans are available for as little as $23.70 a month — for some unmarried women aged 19 to 24 who do not smoke. The plans have a $10,000 deductible, which is $2,650 more than the out-of-pocket costs allowed under a plan that complies with the Affordable Care Act.
A footnote on the website says, “Short-term health insurance is medically underwritten and does not cover pre-existing conditions.”
UnitedHealth supported the Trump administration’s move to extend the duration of short-term policies, saying this would “ensure that more consumers have consecutive months of coverage and fewer consumers experience coverage gaps during a year.”
Short-term plans were originally intended for people who were between jobs or needed temporary coverage for other reasons.
But Mary Dwight, a senior vice president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, said: “The new plans will no longer be just transition coverage. They will be an alternative to comprehensive insurance. They will split the market into plans for healthy people and plans for sick people.”
Advertisement"
frame of article is: government
###
article: "Before Congress left Washington for the year, Republicans finally made good on their determination to knock big holes in the Affordable Care Act, crippling its requirement that most Americans carry health insurance and leaving insurers without billions of dollars in promised federal payments.
At the same time, public support for the perennially controversial law has inched up to around its highest point in a half-dozen years. Nearly 9 million people so far have signed up for ACA health plans for 2018 during a foreshortened enrollment season, far surpassing expectations.
This dual reality puts the sprawling ACA — prized domestic legacy of the Obama era, whipping post of the Trump administration — at a new precipice, with its long-term fate hinging on the November midterm elections certain to consume Washington once the new year begins. If Democrats win a majority in either chamber of Congress, the law would be protected; a GOP sweep could further embolden repeal attempts.
“It’s right on the balance there,” said Robert J. Blendon, a Harvard professor of health policy and political analysis. “The viability of the program is heavily dependent on the outcome of the election, not the changes in between.”
With recent polls showing health care remains a top concern among voters, both major political parties have an incentive to wield it as an election issue. Democrats are likely to argue that the GOP wants to take coverage away from millions of Americans, with Republicans focusing on escalating insurance prices.
What happens in the interim, health policy analysts say, depends on how events play out in three arenas — Capitol Hill, the White House and the insurance industry.
After a year of full GOP control, congressional Republicans and the White House have damaged the ACA but fallen short of their vehement goal of dismantling broad swaths of it. More ambiguous is whether their end-of-year victory — removing tax penalties starting in 2019 for people who violate the insurance mandate — will whet the GOP’s appetite for taking apart more of the law.
“To those who believe — including Senate Republican leadership — that in 2018 there will not be another effort to repeal and replace Obamacare — well you are sadly mistaken,” Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.) tweeted last week.
Graham’s vow was a rejoinder to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.), who suggested in an NPR interview that “we’ll probably move on to other issues.” He also noted that the chamber’s slender GOP majority will shrink to one senator once the Democratic winner of a special election in Alabama is sworn in next month.
McConnell reiterated his intention to try to coax the Senate early in the year to adopt two measures, promised to a crucial Senate Republican moderate in exchange for her support of the massive tax overhaul enacted last week, that would help cushion ACA insurance marketplaces.
One bill would restore for two years the payments that the law guarantees insurers — estimated at $8 billion in 2018 — to reimburse them for discounts that ACA health plans must give lower-income customers for deductibles and other out-of-pocket expenses. President Trump cut off the payments in October.
The other bill would provide about $10 billion over two years to help states create high-risk pools or otherwise help insurers cope with customers with especially high medical costs. House conservatives fiercely opposed both measures.
Meanwhile, the administration is pressing forward with at least one more jab at the ACA marketplaces. As directed by an executive order that President Trump signed this fall, officials are finishing a draft rule to make it easier for insurers to sell meager but inexpensive health plans that skirt the law’s coverage requirements.
The ground-level effect of such changes for consumers rests in large part on how the insurance industry responds. Without the measure to help stabilize the law’s marketplaces and with greater availability of skimpy health plans, “we risk the individual market on the exchanges becoming a de facto high-risk pool,” said one industry official not authorized to speak on the record. That means premiums would soar, causing those exchanges to shrink and become the province of sick, expensive customers.
On the other hand, said Joseph Antos, a health-care scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, more expensive premiums could “move in the opposite direction of knocking down the ACA” because the law’s premium subsidies would rise to keep pace. For the more than 80 percent of ACA customers who qualify for those subsidies, he said, more generous subsidies could make it easier to afford higher tiers of coverage, motivating more people to sign up.
Such hard-to-predict boomerang effects could be true of the insurance mandate as well. The requirement has always been the least popular part of the law. So at a time when the most recent polls show that slightly more than half the public regards the ACA favorably, removing the most objectionable feature “could even be a blessing in disguise” for supporters, said Larry Levitt, senior vice president of the Kaiser Family Foundation.
Trump sought last week to equate the part of the tax legislation that undermines the individual mandate with repeal of the entire law. His assertion at a Cabinet meeting was a pronounced overstatement. Other central features of the ACA remain intact — including its insurance marketplaces, intended for Americans who do not have access to affordable health benefits through a job; the expansion of Medicaid in more than 30 states plus the District of Columbia; and the premium subsidies.
In fact, health-policy analysts say ending the penalties for violating the mandate will be a real-world test of a debate that has simmered for years: whether a legal requirement to be insured motivates people to get coverage, or whether the ACA’s subsidies are a stronger incentive.
According to the most recent federal figures, 6.7 million Americans who flouted the requirement paid a total of about $3 billion in tax penalties in 2015. Ending the penalties will cause an additional 4 million people to be uninsured in 2019 and 13 million within a decade, according to the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office. Insurance premiums in the ACA marketplaces will rise an extra 10 percent in most of those years, the CBO estimates.
If this happens, it will feed the talking points of both political parties, Blendon, the Harvard professor, predicts. “The big-picture issues will be premiums increasing and dropping coverage,” he said.
But for now, Antos says, the unexpectedly high number of people enrolling in ACA plans, in a year when insurance choices shrank, premium costs rose and the White House became a megaphone for criticism of the law, suggests that the law remains “durable.”
“I don’t see big lurches in either direction for both political and practical reasons,” he added. “It’s hard to move the ship once it’s moving.”
Read more:
Americans sprint to get Affordable Care Act coverage in last hours before deadline
Fifth year’s ACA enrollment season opening with daunting obstacles"
frame of article is: government
###
article: "President Trump is throwing a bomb into the insurance marketplaces created under the Affordable Care Act, choosing to end critical payments to health insurers that help millions of lower-income Americans afford coverage. The decision follows an executive order on Thursday to allow alternative health plans that skirt the law’s requirements.
The White House confirmed late Thursday that it would halt federal payments for cost-sharing reductions, although a statement did not specify when. According to two people briefed on the decision, the cutoff will be as of November. The subsidies total about $7 billion this year.
Trump has threatened for months to stop the payments, which help eligible consumers afford their deductibles and other out-of-pocket expenses, but held off while other administration officials warned him that such a move would cause an implosion of the ACA marketplaces that could be blamed on Republicans.
Health insurers and state regulators have been in a state of high anxiety over the prospect of the marketplaces cratering because of such White House action. The fifth year’s open-enrollment season for consumers to buy coverage through ACA exchanges will open in less than three weeks, and insurers have said that stopping the cost-sharing payments would be the single greatest step the Trump administration could take to harm the marketplaces — and the law.
Ending the payments is grounds for any insurer to back out of its federal contract to sell health plans for 2018.
The cost-sharing reductions have long been the subject of a political and legal seesaw. Congressional Republicans argued that the sprawling 2010 health-care law that established the subsidies does not include specific language providing appropriations to cover the government’s cost. House Republicans sued HHS over the payments during President Barack Obama’s second term. A federal court agreed that they were illegal, and the case has been pending before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit.
“The bailout of insurance companies through these unlawful payments is yet another example of how the previous administration abused taxpayer dollars and skirted the law to prop up a broken system,” a statement from the White House said. “Congress needs to repeal and replace the disastrous Obamacare law and provide real relief to the American people.”
For months, administration officials have debated privately about what to do. The president has consistently pushed to cut them off, according to officials and advisers who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss private conversations. Some top health officials within the administration, including former Health and Human Services secretary Tom Price, cautioned that this could exacerbate already escalating premiums on the ACA market, these Republicans said.
But some government lawyers also argued that the payments were not authorized under the existing law, according to one administration official, and would be difficult to keep defending in court.
While the administration will now argue that Congress should appropriate the funds if it wants them to continue, such a proposal will face a serious hurdle on Capitol Hill. In a recent interview, Rep. Tom Cole (R-Okla.), who chairs the House Appropriations Subcommittee overseeing HHS, said it would be difficult to muster support for such a move among House conservatives.
One person familiar with the president’s decision said that HHS officials and Trump’s domestic policy advisers had urged him to continue the payments at least through the end of the year.
The cost-sharing payments are separate from a different subsidy that provides federal assistance on premiums to more than four-fifths of the 10 million Americans with ACA coverage.
Word of the president’s decision, which was first reported by Politico, came just hours after he signed the executive order intended to circumvent the ACA by making it easier for individuals and small businesses to buy alternative types of health insurance with lower prices, fewer benefits and weaker government protections.
The White House and allies portrayed the president’s move as wielding administrative powers to accomplish what congressional Republicans have failed to achieve: fostering more coverage choices while tearing down the law’s insurance marketplaces. Until the White House's announcement late Thursday, the executive order represented Trump’s biggest step to date to reverse the health-care policies of the Obama administration, a central promise since last year’s presidential campaign.
Critics, who include state insurance commissioners, most of the health-insurance industry and mainstream policy specialists, predict that a proliferation of these other kinds of coverage will have damaging ripple effects, driving up costs for consumers with serious medical conditions and prompting more insurers to flee the law’s marketplaces. Part of Trump’s action, they say, will spark court challenges over its legality.
The most far-reaching element of the order instructs a trio of Cabinet departments to rewrite federal rules for “association health plans” — a form of insurance in which small businesses of a similar type band together through an association to negotiate health benefits. These plans have had to meet coverage requirements and consumer protections under the 2010 health-care law, but the administration is likely to exempt them from those rules and let such plans be sold from state to state without insurance licenses in each one.
In addition, the order is designed to expand the availability of short-term insurance policies, which offer limited benefits as a bridge for people between jobs or young adults no longer eligible for their parents’ health plans. The Obama administration ruled that short-term insurance may not last for more than three months; Trump wants to extend that to nearly a year.
Trump’s action also is intended to widen employers’ ability to use pretax dollars in “health reimbursement arrangements” to help workers pay for any medical expenses, not just for health policies that meet ACA rules — another reversal of Obama policy.
In a late-morning signing ceremony in the White House’s Roosevelt Room, surrounded by supportive small-business owners, Cabinet members and a few Republicans from Capitol Hill, the president spoke in his characteristic superlatives about the effects of his action and what he called “the Obamacare nightmare.”
Trump said that Thursday’s move, which will trigger months of regulatory work by federal agencies, “is only the beginning.” He promised “even more relief and more freedom” from ACA rules. And although leading GOP lawmakers are eager to move on from their unsuccessful attempts this year to abolish central facets of the 2010 law, Trump said that “we are going to pressure Congress very strongly to finish the repeal and replace of Obamacare.”
The executive order will fulfill a quest by conservative Republican lawmakers, especially in the House, who have tried for more than two decades to expand the availability of association health plans by allowing them to be sold, unregulated, across state lines. On the other hand, Trump’s approach conflicts with what he and GOP leaders in Congress have held out as a main health-policy goal — giving each state more discretion over matters of insurance.
Health policy experts in think tanks, academia and the health-care industry pointed out that the order’s language is fairly broad, so the ensuing fine print in agencies’ rules will determine whether the impact will be as sweeping or quick as Trump boasted — his directive will provide “millions of people with Obamacare relief,” he said.
Significant questions that remain include whether individuals will be able to join associations, a point that could raise legal issues; whether the administration will start to let association health plans count toward the ACA’s requirement that most Americans carry insurance; and whether such plans can charge higher prices to small businesses with sicker workers — or refuse to insure them.
The president issued the directive less than three weeks before the Nov. 1 start of the fifth open-enrollment season in ACA marketplaces for people who do not have access to affordable health benefits through a job. Trump noted that about half of the nation’s counties will have just one insurer in their exchange, and he claimed that “many will have none.” However, the most recent canvass shows that there will be no “bare” counties in 2018.
A senior administration official, speaking to reporters on the condition of anonymity shortly before Trump signed the order, said that the policy changes it sets in motion will require agencies to follow customary procedures to write new rules and solicit public comment. That means new insurance options will not be available in time for coverage beginning in January, he said.
Even so, with a shortened sign-up period and large cuts in federal funds for advertising and enrollment help already hobbling the marketplaces, “if there’s a lot of hoopla around new options that may be available soon, it could be one more thing that discourages enrollment,” said Larry Levitt, the Kaiser Family Foundation’s senior vice president.
Other aspects of the executive order include commissioning a six-month study, to be led by federal health officials, of ways to limit consolidation within the insurance and hospital industries. Trump also directed agencies to find additional means to increase competition and choice in health care to improve its quality and lower its cost.
The order produced predictable reactions in Congress, with Republican leaders praising the move and Democrats accusing the White House of sabotaging the law.
Among policy experts, critics warned that young and healthy people who use relatively little insurance will gravitate to association health plans because of their lower price tags. That would concentrate older and sicker customers in ACA marketplaces with spiking rates.
Mike Consedine, chief executive of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) said Thursday that the group has long opposed such plans and is concerned that the administration will allow ones that can bypass state licenses and have such weak financial underpinnings that some will collapse, leaving customers stranded and state insurance regulators “picking up the pieces.”
[As ACA enrollment nears, administration keeps cutting federal support of the law]
Short-term health insurance makes up a tiny fraction of the policies sold, with fewer than 30 companies covering only about 160,000 people nationwide at the end of last year, according to NAIC data.
Experts could not point to figures for how many association health plans exist or how many people they insure. Such arrangements have existed for decades, and scandals have on occasion exposed “multi-employer welfare arrangements” started by unscrupulous operators who took members’ money and either did not have enough reserves to cover hospital bills or absconded with premiums.
The National Federation of Independent Business, a small-business lobby, has pressed Congress to allow use of association plans, arguing that they can be less expensive and give workers more insurance choices. Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) has promoted the idea, and he stood just behind Trump at the morning ceremony. After nearly walking out of the room without signing the order, the president returned to affix his signature to the document and then hand Paul the pen.
Selling health plans from state to state without separate licenses — the idea underlying much of the president’s order — has long been a Republican mantra. It has gained little traction in practice, however.
Half a dozen states — before the ACA was passed in 2010 as well as since then — have passed laws permitting insurers to sell health policies approved by other states. And since last year, the ACA has allowed “compacts” in which groups of states can agree that health plans licensed in any of them could be sold in the others. Under such compacts, federal health officials must make sure the plans offer at least the same benefits and are as affordable as those sold in the ACA marketplaces.
As of this summer, “no state was known to actually offer or sell such policies,” according to a report by the National Conference of State Legislatures. A main reason, experts say, is insurers’ difficulty in arranging networks of doctors and other providers of care far from their home states."
frame of article is: government
###
article: "Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) released a new proposal to overhaul the Affordable Care Act on Thursday after spending three weeks reworking it to win over wavering lawmakers on the right and in the center.
But within hours, it was clear that Senate leaders still didn’t have the votes to fulfill their long-standing quest to replace former president Barack Obama’s 2010 health-care law.
The new draft would lift many of the ACA’s regulatory requirements, allowing insurers to offer bare-bones policies without coverage for services such as preventive or mental health care. It would also direct billions of dollars to help lower- and middle-income Americans buy plans on the private market.
However, the draft leaves in place deep proposed cuts to Medicaid — and at least three Republicans quickly stated that they remain opposed, casting doubt on McConnell’s plans to pass the bill next week.
“This is not what the American people expect of us, and it’s not what they deserve,” said Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.), one of the three senators who said they oppose McConnell’s new bill.
The GOP’s continuing push — and continuing struggle — to make good on a campaign promise it began invoking seven years ago to “repeal and replace” Obamacare reflected the peril Republicans face whether they pass a bill or not.
On the one hand, the ACA has provided medical coverage for millions of Americans — and has grown more popular as a result. Moderate Republicans remained concerned Thursday that the new proposal would make insurance unaffordable for some middle-income Americans and throw millions off the rolls of Medicaid, the public insurance for disabled and low-income Americans.
Yet conservatives continued to push for a more wholesale rollback of the ACA — highlighting the danger for all Republicans of failing to achieve a promise most of them made on the campaign trail.
“The new Senate health care bill is substantially different from the version released last month, and it is unclear to me whether it has improved,” Sen. Mike Lee (R-Utah), a conservative who has pushed for a full Obamacare repeal, said in a statement. “I will need time to study the new version and speak with experts about whether it does enough to lower health insurance premiums for middle class families.”
Looming even larger was the reality that Republicans, despite their control of both chambers of Congress and with President Trump in the White House, have made little progress on an ambitious agenda that McConnell had hoped to move on to next week after a vote on the health-care bill. Among their goals are major tax legislation, raising the debt ceiling and passing a defense authorization bill.
Republican leaders seemed to acknowledge Thursday the difficult path ahead, with several speaking privately about internal divisions on how to pass the bill — and to prevent further defections.
“We will have the votes when we start voting,” said Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn (R-Tex.).
McConnell’s new draft was the result of weeks of negotiations with conservatives and moderates. For those on the right, the plan incorporated a proposal from Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) allowing insurers to offer minimalist policies as long as they offer more-comprehensive ones as well. Cruz said the provision would give consumers greater choice and lower-cost premiums.
For those in the center, the new proposal would spend an additional $70 billion offsetting consumers’ costs and $45 billion to treat opioid addiction.
Republicans financed these changes by keeping a trio of Obamacare taxes targeting high-earners — a 3.8 percent tax on net investment income and a 0.9 percent Medicare payroll tax on individuals making $200,000 a year or couples earning $250,000, along with a tax on insurers with high-paid executives. Lawmakers such as Sen. Bob Corker (R-Tenn.) said repealing those taxes would give too much relief to the wealthy at the expense of the poor.
The new measure has won Cruz’s backing, but Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.), another conservative who said the measure still does not do enough to unravel Obamacare, remained opposed to voting on the bill, as did two centrists, McCain and Sen. Susan Collins (R-Maine).
“My strong intention and current inclination is to vote no on the motion to proceed,” Collins told reporters, referring to the procedural vote required before the legislation can reach the Senate floor. Collins added that she hopes Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) will be willing to work with Republicans to fix the legislation. “I have had numerous Democrats come to me and say they want to work with us on the bill,” she said. “I’m going to take them at their word.”
Even as McConnell negotiated with individual members, the outlook for the bill was complicated when Sens. Bill Cassidy (R-La.) and Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.) debuted an alternative proposal.
In a joint interview with CNN on Thursday, Cassidy and Graham said they would take the billions of dollars the federal government now receives in taxes under the ACA and direct that revenue to the states.
The plan did not appear to be gaining traction — Graham said he would vote to start debate on McConnell’s bill — but its introduction underscored the extent to which a growing number of GOP senators have started looking beyond the current effort, with diminishing confidence that it will prevail.
“I don’t see this as the end if this bill were not to pass,” Collins said. “I see it as the beginning of the kind of process that I would have liked to have seen in the first place.”
The surprise announcement from Graham and Cassidy came just before Senate GOP leaders released their revised health-care proposal.
The McConnell plan would allow Americans to pay for premiums with money from tax-exempt health savings accounts, an idea that many conservatives have pushed for — a tax break that primarily would benefit the upper middle class.
The plan’s proposed rollback of Medicaid expansion under the ACA, as well as a proposal to slow the overall growth of the program starting in 2025, gave a number of Republican moderates pause Thursday.
Sen. Rob Portman (R-Ohio), who came out against the original draft of the bill, said he was not yet willing to vote yes to move the bill to the floor. “I’m in the same position I’ve been in, looking at the language and looking forward to the analysis,” he said.
Cassidy and Sen. John Hoeven (R-N.D.) said they need to see the Congressional Budget Office score, due next week, before making a decision.
“We are going to look at it, read it, understand it and see the CBO score,” Hoeven told reporters. He said that he was encouraged by changes intended to help lower-income Americans but that, “at this point, I’m reserving judgment.”
In a sign of the challenge McConnell still faces to round up votes, he huddled Thursday afternoon in his office with Portman and Sens. Shelley Moore Capito (R-W.Va.), Dean Heller (R-Nev.) and Lisa Murkowski (R-Alaska). Those lawmakers hail from states that have extended Medicaid under the current law to cover able-bodied, childless adults. Capito, who opposed the earlier bill, said in a statement she still has “serious concerns” about the revised draft.
With Vice President Pence prepared to cast a tiebreaking vote and no Democrats expected to support the bill, Republicans need the support of 50 of their 52 members to pass the legislation.
Senate leaders and Trump officials are aware that moderate Republican holdouts may be the bill’s biggest threat.
Seema Verma, administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, made a presentation to a group of Republican senators from Medicaid-expansion states Thursday afternoon. She promised to do everything possible to minimize the number of uninsured, by giving states maximum flexibility in how they could use some of the money from the bill’s $182 billion state stabilization fund.
Nearly 15 million Americans would lose their Medicaid coverage by 2026 under the Senate bill, according to the CBO. Verma sought to minimize that outlook, saying states could use the stabilization funding to heavily subsidize private coverage for these Americans — even though the size of the fund does not come close to the bill’s $772 billion in cuts to the program over the next decade.
Cruz said the new bill was a “substantial improvement” over the first version and argued that a focus on reducing premiums was the best way to unite fractured Republicans. He touted his proposal as means of accomplishing both.
“It’s not what the federal government mandates you have to buy — it’s your choice what health insurance is the best for you and your family,” Cruz said.
Critics, including insurers, say that providing the option of skimpier plans would draw younger, healthier consumers into a separate risk pool. That development would drive up rates for the Americans buying more-comprehensive coverage on the individual market, which could in turn destabilize the entire market.
The revised bill would establish a $70 billion fund to subsidize insurers providing both kinds of plans “for the associated costs of covering high-risk individuals,” according to a GOP summary of the bill. It would also allow individuals buying catastrophic plans to get a federal tax credit if they would be otherwise eligible, which is now barred under current law.
Larry Levitt, senior vice president for special initiatives at the Kaiser Family Foundation, said in an interview that “healthy people could end up with much lower premiums,” on the private insurance market, though the proposal’s regulatory changes could upend coverage for those with costly medical conditions.
“There are many provisions in this bill that destabilize the individual insurance,” he said. “Then it attempts to restabilize it by funneling an enormous amount of money to insurers.”
The Senate bill also includes a limited exemption for members of Congress, which Republicans said was due to procedural limitations in Senate budget rules. Cruz introduced a measure to strike the exemption Thursday afternoon, saying in a statement, “While this exemption was included in the Senate health care bill out of procedural necessity, we must still be diligent in ensuring that Members of Congress are treated just like other Americans under this law.”
Senate leaders are leaving themselves the option of jettisoning the Cruz proposal after they get the nonpartisan CBO score, which will gauge the Cruz amendment’s impact on the budget and the overall number of uninsured.
Cornyn said Thursday that he expects the CBO will release two scores for the bill but would not confirm what those scores would include or when they will be released.
“We are expecting a CBO score, but I can’t tell you exactly what the format will be,” Cornyn told reporters, adding that the Cruz amendment would be scored.
Paige Winfield Cunningham and David Weigel contributed to this report."
frame of article is: government
###
article: "ObamaCare mandate says goodbye in 2019, as health law faces new threat
The Affordable Care Act will lose its teeth in 2019, as the penalty for not buying insurance disappears – leaving the health care law’s future as murky as ever.
On one hand, recently released enrollment numbers indicate the system may be able to survive the elimination of the so-called individual mandate penalty – which was stripped as part of last year’s tax overhaul.
While the requirement to buy insurance was considered a crucial part of the original law, enrollment dipped but did not dive in anticipation of that penalty disappearing. The official numbers show enrollment in the 39 states that use the federal exchange declined by 4.2 percent from last year – from roughly 8.8 million to 8.5 million.
CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP
“The funny aspect to the individual mandate is that it mostly was [threatening] to penalize people who were already going to buy insurance anyway,” said Robert Graboyes, a senior research fellow and health scholar at George Mason University’s libertarian-oriented Mercatus Center.
In other words, Graboyes said, the vast majority of people who signed up on the government-run portal did not need the threat of a penalty.
Meanwhile, many people who did not find ObamaCare to be a good deal skipped it and either paid the price or made an excuse. Figures from the Internal Revenue Service show that 4.1 million taxpayers in 2017 paid the penalty for not having insurance in 2016. The federal government collected $2.9 billion in revenue from those taxpayers. Another 10.8 million taxpayers claimed one of many hardship exemptions.
Yet experts said the elimination of the penalty is just one of many factors driving an enrollment decline.
The big question going into 2019 and beyond will be whether that slide will continue, and whether the system will continue to take on sicker customers while losing the young and healthy – creating an imbalance that would threaten higher prices. Add to the mix a recent court ruling against the law, and ObamaCare continues to take hits despite Republicans’ repeated failure to repeal it.
Edmund Haislmaier, a health policy expert at the conservative-leaning Heritage Foundation, said many people who were young and healthy have concluded that insurance simply was not worth it. This is especially true if they had no assets that would be at risk if an emergency caused them to be treated without insurance at a hospital.
“What [the architects of the law] didn’t account for was the behavior of the target population,” he said.
For now, Republican congressional efforts to further dismantle the law – beyond their mauling of the mandate – are dead in the water for at least the next two years, with Democrats taking back the House.
But ObamaCare now faces a new legal threat, following a federal court ruling this month declaring the health care law unconstitutional – and creating a new element of uncertainty.
OBAMACARE COULD RETURN TO SUPREME COURT
That legal dispute is tied to the mandate penalty’s elimination.
Back in 2012, the Supreme Court upheld ObamaCare’s individual mandate, ruling that the government could require the purchase of health insurance under its taxing power. But in his recent opinion, U.S. District Judge Reed O'Connor ruled that because the mandate penalty was eliminated, the rest of the law is invalid.
“The remainder of the ACA is non-severable from the individual mandate, meaning that the Act must be invalidated in whole,” O’Connor wrote.
The Affordable Care Act remains in place pending appeal as the law’s defenders vow to preserve it. Speaker-designate Nancy Pelosi blasted the ruling as “absurd.” The case eventually could come before the Supreme Court.
Josh Blackman, a South Texas College of Law Houston professor who has written two books on ObamaCare, said the judiciary must look at what the lawmakers who drafted the plan thought of the mandate. And there is plenty in the record indicating that they believed the law could not work without it, he said.
“We have to look at the mandate and the intent of the 2010 Congress to resolve this question,” he said.
The mandate originally was pitched as a way to get healthy people to sign up for subsidized insurance and offset the costs for others, thus keeping the program’s overall costs in check.
The Congressional Budget Office long had predicted that without the stick of a penalty, millions of people would ignore the carrot of subsidized health care. Last year, the budget forecasters determined that eliminating the mandate would result in 13 million fewer people with insurance by 2027 than if it remained in place. That included 5 million fewer people on Medicaid – even though the program is free to enrollees.
But Cynthia Cox, director of the program for the study of health reform and private insurance at the Kaiser Family Foundation, said polling conducted by her organization indicates many people were not even aware of the penalty.
“The mandate is only as effective as people know about it. … To me, that just seems like a lack of information,” she said.
The penalty itself has risen from its inception. People filing their tax returns in April will have to pay the greater of 2.5 percent of household income or $695 per adult and $347.50 per child if they did not have health insurance for the entirety of 2018. That is far less than the cost of coverage for many people, though.
And come 2019, the penalty imposed on people without insurance will drop to zero when they file their returns in 2020.
Cox pointed to other explanations for the enrollment decline, including an improving economy that has allowed more people to get insurance from employers and the introduction of short-term, limited-duration health plans that are designed to fill insurance gaps when people are between jobs.
Joshua Peck, co-founder of the advocacy group Get America Covered, disputed that the decline is the result of a stronger economy. He noted that the economy has been growing each year the Affordable Care Act has been in place. But he agreed that the new short-term alternatives – what he calls “junk plans” – have played a role.
Peck also blamed the Trump administration for slashing outreach efforts by 90 percent over the past two years. Although “most people are not motivated by the penalty,” he argued, eliminating the mandate has not helped.
“It did have an impact,” he said. “But it isn’t all by itself the most important factor.”"
frame of article is: government
###
article: "If you’re among the nearly one-third of U.S. taxpayers who can’t get their calls answered by the nation’s tax collector, reports of improved assistance by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) won’t mean much.
But when the agency’s 70 percent telephone answer rate for this filing season is compared to its 38 percent rate for the last fiscal year, mediocre starts to look good.
“The IRS is continuing to struggle to deliver for the American taxpayer,” Tony Reardon, president of the National Treasury Employees Union (NTEU), told reporters Thursday. “I think that there’s no question but that the IRS needs more resources and they need more personnel to meet the demand for taxpayer services, to catch tax cheats and criminals, to effectively fight identity fraud, to enforce tax laws and to collect all the taxes that are owed.”
Reardon, who represents IRS employees, called the telephone news conference to continue the union’s long fight for adequate agency funding. Budget cuts so devastated the ability of the IRS to help taxpayers that “service” didn’t rightly fit in the agency’s name.
When more than six of 10 taxpayers were not getting their calls answered last year, it marked a stark drop in service for the agency people love to hate even in the best of times. The high point in recent years was 87 percent in 2004, and at no time since then has the percentage of answered calls fallen below 50 percent — until 2015.
This year’s dramatic improvement has been fueled by temporary hires. When they go, the relatively good performance will too. IRS Commissioner John Koskinen expects the portion of callers who get telephone service will be just 47 percent for all of 2016.
“Even that’s much better than last year, but we want everybody to understand that it’s still not where we want it to be,” he told the National Press Club two weeks ago. “If we received the president’s fiscal 2017 budget request, our phone level of service would be up to 75 percent next year for the entire year.”
The IRS suffered a 21 percent staffing cut, amounting to almost 23,000 full- and part-time employees, from 2011 to 2016, according to NTEU. It released changes in IRS staffing state by state.
Yet, as the number of staffers fell, the workload grew.
An IRS statement said its budget is “more than $900 million below 2010 levels despite handling more than 10 million additional tax returns a year and gaining major legislative programs since then.”
It shouldn’t be such a struggle, especially for an agency that more than pays for itself. If fact, it funds more than 90 percent of the federal government, while generating a return on investment that would make Wall Street salivate.
“So it costs the IRS about 35 cents to collect $100,” Koskinen said. “Now, if Congress were to give us the $1 billion increase requested in the president’s budget proposal for fiscal year 2017, that means we’d be able to do more. If Congress were to fund the president’s budget, we estimate that the enforcement improvements we have planned would yield $64 billion over the 10-year budget window that’s commonly used. That would average out to about $6 billion a year. Keep in mind, I’m not talking about new taxes. This is money that’s already owed but not collected due to our staffing shortages.”
Those figures, however, pale in comparison to the huge tax gap between what is owed and what is paid on time. A Government Accountability Office report released Tuesday said implementing its recommendations to IRS “is a key step in reducing the $385 billion net tax gap, as well as in strengthening tax administration and service to taxpayers.”
Of course, the IRS would be better able to implement the recommendations with increased funding.
“We’ve been saying this for years,” Reardon said. “It’s time for Congress to pay attention to these warnings and give the IRS the resources it needs to better serve the American people.”
Read more:
[Weak IRS controls leave taxpayer data vulnerable, report says]
[The IRS has improved but still provides bad customer service]
[Watch out for tax scammers who have more time to take your money]"
frame of article is: government
###
article: "WASHINGTON — The Senate moved closer to approving a sweeping overhaul of the tax code on Wednesday, voting to begin debate on the tax bill as Republican leaders continue trying to secure the votes for final passage.
The procedural vote, which passed 52 to 48 along party lines, put the Senate on track for a final vote later this week.
The push by Senate Republicans to pass an ambitious tax overhaul now enters a critical and politically delicate phase. Republican leaders still lack firm commitments from enough of their members to ensure passage later in the week, and significant changes were still being discussed on Wednesday.
Among the biggest potential changes would involve nudging the corporate tax rate from the proposed 20 percent rate to 22 percent. Such a move would still result in a large cut from the current top rate of 35 percent, but would give lawmakers some additional money to use for other concessions to help win over reticent lawmakers.
The higher rate was floated on Wednesday by two Republican senators, Marco Rubio of Florida and Mike Lee of Utah, who want to use the money from a higher corporate rate to pay for an expanded child tax credit.Continue reading the main story
“It makes us just as competitive, but it allows us to do the pro-worker reform that we desperately need,” Mr. Rubio said.
Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, expressed openness to a slightly higher corporate rate than the Senate had proposed.
“Failure is not an option,” Mr. Graham said when asked about raising the corporate tax rate to pay for other changes. “If you’ve got to go up a point or two to make it work, I’m fine with it.”
But the White House was not receptive.
“We do support the child tax credit,” said Raj Shah, a White House spokesman. “We also think that it’s important to make businesses more competitive. We would not support raising the corporate rate as outlined in that amendment.”
In a significant concession, Republicans were planning to sweeten the tax treatment for so-called pass-through businesses by boosting a tax deduction for owners of those businesses.
But an additional sticking point emerged in the form of how to guard against ballooning budget deficits, with Republicans discussing whether automatic spending cuts could be put in place to ensure that deficits do not soar if the expected economic growth doesn’t materialize.
As negotiations among Republicans continued, Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, the top Democrat on the Finance Committee, complained that lawmakers did not know what exactly they would be debating.
“There are rumors; there are whispers,” he said shortly before the procedural vote, adding that the bill “seems to have changed practically every half-hour.”
As Republicans negotiate, they are encumbered by parliamentary rules that limit what provisions can be included in the bill. Another restriction: the final bill cannot cost more than $1.5 trillion over 10 years.
The measure’s prospects have nonetheless seemed on the ascent, as reluctant senators speak more positively about the overhaul.
Senate Republicans are using the same procedures to move the tax overhaul through the chamber as they used this summer to try to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act. In that effort, Republicans succeeded in voting to start debate, just as they did on Wednesday, but they could not ultimately muster the votes to approve a repeal bill.
To pass a tax bill in the Senate, Republicans will need the support of 50 of their 52 members, assuming no Democrats vote for the bill and Vice President Mike Pence breaks a 50-50 tie. The House already passed a tax package that differs substantially from the Senate’s version, so if the Senate can succeed in passing its bill, the two chambers would then need to reconcile the two plans.
But big changes could still be made to the Senate package in the next day or two. The Senate’s debate on the tax overhaul is limited to 20 hours, to be followed by a marathon series of amendment votes known as a vote-a-rama.
Two Republican senators, Ron Johnson of Wisconsin and Steve Daines of Montana, have been unhappy with how the Senate plan treats so-called pass-through businesses, whose profits are distributed to their owners and taxed at individual income tax rates.
The current Senate plan allows pass-through owners to deduct 17.4 percent of business income as a way of lowering their tax rates. But Republicans now plan to boost the deduction to 20 percent, people familiar with the matter said.
Before Wednesday’s vote, Mr. Daines said that he had “seen enough progress to vote yes to move the debate forward,” alluding to the larger deduction.
“There has been some good progress for Main Street businesses in the tax cut bill,” he wrote. “I was able to secure more than $60 billion in tax cuts for Main Street businesses.”
Then there are Republican senators with concerns about ballooning the national debt, which has topped $20 trillion, a group that includes Bob Corker of Tennessee, Jeff Flake of Arizona and James Lankford of Oklahoma.
Mr. Corker said Tuesday that he had received a commitment for some kind of mechanism to be added to the bill that would raise certain taxes if projected economic growth falls short of expectations. And Mr. Lankford cited the trigger provision as he voiced support for the tax overhaul on Wednesday.
But the mechanics of such a “trigger” have not been laid out in detail, and some Republican lawmakers have reacted coolly to the proposal. Conservative groups like the Club for Growth and Americans for Tax Reform adamantly oppose the idea, saying it would undercut the economic growth by injecting uncertainty into the tax system.
“Any senator who understands basic business principles and truly cares about the deficit should understand that this trigger is an automatic tax increase and will actually harm economic growth,” said David McIntosh, the president of the Club for Growth.
An alternative approach would be to impose automatic spending cuts in the event that economic growth falls short of projections. Mr. Graham said that some of his colleagues saw cuts to nonmilitary programs as preferable to rolling back the tax cuts if they do not bring sufficient economic growth. He said that Republicans were divided on the idea of a trigger and what it would affect.
Senator John Kennedy, Republican of Louisiana, said he opposes the concept of a trigger, but prefers one that cuts spending to one that increases taxes. Senator Bill Cassidy, the other Louisiana Republican, also appeared fond of the idea of using spending cuts as a safeguard in the bill.
“It’s intriguing, isn’t it?” he said.Continue reading the main story"
frame of article is: government
###
article: "Several senior White House officials have begun discussing whether to push for a temporary payroll tax cut as a way to arrest an economic slowdown, three people familiar with the discussions said, revealing growing concerns about the economy among President Trump’s top economic aides.
The talks are still in their early stages and have included a range of other tax breaks. The officials also have not decided whether to formally push Congress to approve any of these measures, these people said, speaking on condition of anonymity because they weren’t authorized to disclose internal discussions. But the White House in recent days has begun searching for proposals that could halt a slowing economy.
Even though the discussions within the White House had begun, the White House released a statement disputing that the payroll tax idea was actively under “consideration.”
“As (National Economic Council Director Larry Kudlow) said yesterday, more tax cuts for the American people are certainly on the table, but cutting payroll taxes is not something under consideration at this time,” the statement said.
Discussing whether to cut payroll taxes is part of a rapidly evolving effort within the White House to both exude confidence about the economy’s strength while simultaneously hunting for ways to rescue business and consumer confidence. Business spending already has pulled back, in part because of fears about the trade war, but consumer spending has remained robust. If ordinary Americans begin to tighten their belts later this year, the economy could suffer new strain.
Millions of Americans pay a “payroll tax” on their earnings, a 6.2 percent levy that is used to finance Social Security programs. The payroll tax was last cut in 2011 and 2012 during the Obama administration to 4.2 percent, as a way to encourage more consumer spending during the recent economic downturn. But the cut was allowed to reset back up to 6.2 percent in 2013.
Workers pay payroll taxes on income up to $132,900, so cutting the tax has remained a popular idea for many lawmakers, especially Democrats, seeking to deliver savings for middle-income earners and not the wealthiest Americans. But payroll tax cuts can also add dramatically to the deficit and – depending on how they are designed – pull billions of dollars away from Social Security.
The payroll tax cuts during the Obama administration reduced taxes by more than $100 billion each year, but the Obama administration directed the lost revenue to Social Security programs, so those initiatives didn’t lose money. The cuts added to the deficit, however.
The size of the cut could equate to a bigger tax cut for many families than the 2017 tax law.
The Trump administration discussions about whether to pursue a new payroll tax cut have only begun in recent days, the three people said, and specific details about the design have not been reached yet.
Trump and top aides have spent the past few days trying to convince the public that the economy is strong and that fears about a recession are misguided. But White House officials quietly have begun scrambling for new ideas to reverse public concerns and boost business confidence.
Some administration officials have felt that planning for an economic downturn would send a negative perception to the public and make things worse, but Trump has spent much of the past week conferring with business executives and other confidants seeking input on what they are seeing in the economy.
There are signs the U.S. economy is slowing, and economists fear that Germany and the United Kingdom already are tipping towards a recession. So far, consumer spending has remained one of the U.S. economy’s bright spots, and White House officials are aware that Trump’s reelection chances could hinge on the economy staying strong into next year.
Payroll tax cuts have remained popular with Democrats largely because they are seen as targeting working Americans, and the money is often immediately spent by consumers and not saved. That way, the money gives consumers more spending power, but it also helps businesses who rely on the income.
The White House talks are at such an early stage that they have not begun consulting with key lawmakers yet.
A spokesman for Senate Finance Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley said the lawmaker had not discussed a payroll tax cut with the White House, and that “at this point, recession seems to be more of a political wish by Democrats than an economic reality.”
White House officials have become acutely focused on protecting strong levels of consumer spending. That’s because one of the biggest causes of economic downturns is a pullback in consumer spending. That hurts businesses, which then lay off workers, who then cut back on spending — a painful economic loop.
In the past, Democrats have strongly supported payroll tax cuts, while Republicans have been more resistent. Republicans have complained that these cuts do not help the economy and disproportionately harm the deficit.
White House officials have shifted wildly in recent days with varying assessments about the economy. White House economic adviser Larry Kudlow has sought to convey optimism, but Trump has been less consistent.
The president on Monday sought to play down the risk of a recession while also pinning the blame for a potential economic downturn on the Federal Reserve, chastising the central bank’s chairman, Jerome H. Powell, for a “horrendous lack of vision.”
In a tweet, Trump also called for the Fed to reduce interest rates by at least 100 basis points, marking an escalation of his demands on the central bank. Trump has frequently lashed out at Powell but had never used the phrase “basis points” in a tweet or made such a specific demand.
“Our Economy is very strong, despite the horrendous lack of vision by Jay Powell and the Fed, but the Democrats are trying to ‘will’ the Economy to be bad for purposes of the 2020 Election,” Trump tweeted. “Very Selfish! Our dollar is so strong that it is sadly hurting other parts of the world.”
He then declared that interest rates, “over a fairly short period of time, should be reduced by at least 100 basis points, with perhaps some quantitative easing as well.”
“If that happened, our Economy would be even better, and the World Economy would be greatly and quickly enhanced-good for everyone!” he said.
The Fed funds rate, which Trump is trying to tell central bankers to cut, is currently set at 2.25 percent. Slashing it 100 basis points would lower this rate to 1.25 percent, giving them very little additional wiggle room to maneuver if a full-fledged recession began.
His directive for them to launch a new phase of “quantitative easing” is shorthand for asking the Fed to pump more money into the economy, a step that could weaken the U.S. dollar. This is also seen as an extreme step that central bankers take when they are trying to urgently address a slumping economy, not a tactic that is employed when the economy is still growing.
Fed officials have said they do not make decisions based on political pressure, but Trump has taken his attacks on the central bank to new extremes, particularly this month amid numerous signs that the U.S. economy is weakening more than expected.
After a tumultuous week in the markets suggested that the economy is heading onto shaky ground, Trump and his top officials have touted what they believe are the economy’s strengths, particularly consumer spending, and predicted that a recession will not occur.
As concerns mount, Kudlow has scheduled briefing calls this week with state and local business leaders, conservative groups, and others to both guage the economy’s strength and seek more input.
White House spokesman Judd Deere said the calls, which “have been long-planned,” will focus on Trump’s economic agenda, including issues such as deregulation and energy production.
But even as the White House has dismissed the notion that the country may be headed toward a recession, Trump and his aides have sent mixed messages.
In an exchange with reporters in Morristown, N.J., shortly before taking off for Washington on Sunday evening, Trump brushed aside the possibility of a downturn, saying, “I don’t see a recession.”
“I mean, the world is in a recession right now — although that’s too big a statement,” he added, in a remark that appeared to undercut his effort to calm fears.
- Felicia Sonmez contributed to this report."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "The tax plan the Trump administration released Wednesday consists (so far) of a single page of bullet points.
If this were a more rounded plan, we could wait for the tax wonks at various think tanks to run it through their models and tell with some precision how it would affect people at different income levels and who would benefit from different deductions.
Lacking that level of detail, we can know only in broad-brush strokes which Americans would win and which would lose. In a homage to the Trump plan itself, here are those winners and losers in bulleted form.
Winners
■ Businesses with high tax rates. The plan would cut the 35 percent corporate income tax to 15 percent. While few businesses pay the full 35 percent rate, those that pay something close to it are in line for a huge tax cut.Continue reading the main story
■ High-income earners. The plan would reduce the top rate on individual income tax — now 39.6 percent for income over around $470,000 for a married couple — to 35 percent. But that’s only part of the gain for high-income earners. It also would eliminate a 3.8 percent tax, used to help fund Obamacare, that applies to investment income over $250,000 for a couple.
■ People with creative accountants. The 15 percent business tax rate could open a huge loophole for people to receive business income through a limited liability company or other pass-through entity instead of as wages. Depending on how the law is drafted, that could enable some people to pay that low 15 percent rate on their earnings instead of an individual income rate up to 35 percent. People who already receive their income through investment vehicles wouldn’t have to change anything for a windfall.
■ Multimillionaires who want to pass money to their heirs tax-free. The plan would eliminate the estate tax, which currently applies to individuals with estates of $5.5 million or couples with estates worth $11 million.
■ People who still fill out their tax returns by hand. Administration officials said the plan would simplify paying taxes, particularly emphasizing plans to eliminate the alternative minimum tax. The A.M.T. can definitely be annoying, and costly, but if you use an online tax preparation service, the software does most of the work.
■ Retailers and other companies that feared a “border adjustment tax.” The Trump administration did not embrace House Republicans’ big strategy to pay for the tax cut, which was strongly opposed by the retail industry and others that thought they would be losers.
■ Donald J. Trump. It is striking how many of the categories listed above affect the president and his family. He is a high-income earner. He receives income from 564 business entities, according to his financial disclosure form, and could take advantage of the low rate on “pass-through” companies. According to his leaked 2005 tax return, he paid an extra $31 million because of the alternative minimum tax that he seeks to eliminate. And his heirs could eventually enjoy his enormous assets tax-free.
Losers
■ Upper-middle-income people in blue states. The plan would eliminate the federal tax deduction for state and local income tax. If you are in a place where such taxes are high, like New York or California, you would lose a valuable deduction.
■ Deficit hawks. The Trump plan doesn’t come with any estimates of its impact on the federal deficit. But his campaign plan, to which the new document is distinctly similar, was estimated by the analysts at the Tax Policy Center to reduce federal revenue by $6.2 trillion over a decade. That implies either a very large increase in the national debt or huge reductions in federal spending.
■ People who want Congress to pass something. While the Trump plan solves some of the policy contradictions of his earlier promises with a “candy for everyone” approach to cutting taxes, that leaves it with even bigger political contradictions. The plan’s tilt toward businesses and the affluent means that Democratic support will be scarce to nonexistent. A law passed via the Senate’s budget reconciliation process — preventing a filibuster by Democrats and allowing a narrow majority of Republicans to prevail — is not permitted to increase the deficit beyond a 10-year window. That means the major provisions would probably have to be temporary. Even if adjusted to be temporary, the presence of deficit hawks among Republicans would make the Trump plan no slam dunk to pass.Continue reading the main story"
frame of article is: government
###
article: "WASHINGTON — The sweeping tax overhaul approved by Congress this week hands Republicans a long-sought achievement they believe will bolster their defenses in next year’s midterm campaign, but party officials concede the measure may only mitigate their losses in what is shaping up to be a punishing election year.
While the tax legislation is broadly unpopular as it reaches President Trump’s desk, the bill offers Republicans the sort of signature accomplishment they have been lacking to galvanize their demoralized donors and many of their voters.
Republican lawmakers, who spent much of this year forced to explain or defend Mr. Trump’s erratic behavior, now have an opportunity to go on the offensive with an issue that unites their increasingly fractious party. And they hope that up-for-grabs voters will reward them should the economy keep growing while their tax bills are falling.
“Once the withholding tables change in January, voters will realize their paychecks are bigger as a result of tax reform,” said Representative Steve Stivers of Ohio, who runs the House Republican campaign arm. But, alluding to past midterm defeats for the party in power at the White House, he acknowledged that “history is against us.”
To reinforce the party’s message, the primary House Republican “super PAC,” the Congressional Leadership Fund, is planning a $10 million advertising and grass-roots campaign beginning next month in some of their most competitive districts to highlight the rate reductions, higher standard deduction and child tax credits in the bill. Corporations such as AT&T and Wells Fargo delivered Republicans an immediate gift by announcing they would reward employees financially because of the tax cut.Continue reading the main story
Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, said in an interview that Senate Republicans next year would batter the many Democrats who are on the ballot in states won by Mr. Trump, such places as North Dakota, West Virginia and Indiana, for opposing the bill.
Yet with voters indicating by wide margins they prefer Democrats to control Congress and bestowing Mr. Trump with historically low approval ratings, the tax plan is hardly a panacea for Republican lawmakers on the ballot in 2018. At best, it is the political equivalent of tacking up plywood against exterior windows to lessen the inevitable damage of an impending storm.
Officials in both parties believe Democratic gains in the House, where Republicans enjoy a 24-seat majority, could reach as high as 40 seats if the political environment does not improve for the Republicans.
And, as of now, it only appears to be worsening.
A CNN poll released on Wednesday found that 56 percent of registered voters said they would vote Democratic next November, compared to 38 percent who favored the Republicans, a yawning 18-percentage-point gap that was only slightly bigger than other recent polls. Through that lens, impressions of the new tax law could be warped by partisan feelings.
This advantage is showing up in fund-raising, where Democrats are harvesting small-dollar contributions. The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee announced on Wednesday that it raised $6.9 million in November, outraising its Republican counterpart for the seventh month in a row. In November, the National Republican Congressional Committee raised only $3.8 million.
House Republicans, however, still have more money on hand and the Republican National Committee has far more cash than the Democratic National Committee. In the Senate, the Democratic campaign arm has slightly more money in the bank than the Republicans.
Beyond the raw numbers, Democratic enthusiasm is soaring. And the sort of centrist voters that both parties covet are contemptuous of Mr. Trump because of his behavior and character, elements that are highly unlikely to change by next fall no matter what policies emerge from Washington.
“The downside of doing nothing was much higher,” former Representative Thomas M. Davis III, a Virginia Republican who previously led the party’s House campaign efforts, said of the tax bill. “But the major problem for Republicans is not that they haven’t delivered — it’s the way he conducts himself.”
“Republicans have a big storm coming at them,” he added. “We just don’t know if it’s a bad wind storm or a Category Five hurricane.”
Mr. Trump has the lowest approval rating of any modern president this soon into his tenure, and midterm elections are inevitably referendums on the party that controls the White House. He is especially unpopular among women, who in this year’s statewide and special elections have overwhelmingly supported Democrats. According to a new NBC News-Wall Street Journal poll, 62 percent of female voters disapproved of Mr. Trump.
So Democrats, some of them still bearing wounds from President Barack Obama’s midterm losses, believe the tax measure will ultimately be of little consequence compared to the man who occupies the Oval Office.
“You can’t run from the top of your ticket,” said Representative Rick Larsen of Washington, who got a scare in the Affordable Care Act-fueled backlash of 2010. “That’s been proven to me over and over again. And the driver won’t be the tax cut vote. It’ll be the unpopularity of the president.”
There is also scant evidence large-scale tax bills offer much in the way of a political lift. Republicans suffered losses in 1982, a year after President Reagan’s first tax bill, and in 1986, just a few months after Congress passed the last tax overhaul. The 2002 gains by Republicans were more the result of a rallying around the commander-in-chief in the months after the attacks of Sept 11, 2001, than the tax cuts that the party passed a year earlier.
Mr. Obama’s economic stimulus plan of 2009 included tax cuts that went straight into paychecks — and were hardly noticed ahead of the Republican Tea Party tidal wave in 2010.
Complicating matters for Republicans, some of their House seats that are most in jeopardy are in high-income and high-tax states where many voters will feel little benefit from a bill that limits mortgage interest deductions and state and local tax write-offs. Eleven of the 12 House Republicans who opposed the bill hail from California, New York and New Jersey, most of them from affluent districts that are already uneasy with Mr. Trump.
“I think each individual congressman will be judged on how they voted,” said Representative Dan Donovan, the only Republican who represents New York City, who opposed the measure because of the limitations on local tax deductions. “The voters will know how hard we fought.”
Yet as the fallout from the Affordable Care Act demonstrated in 2010, when half of the 34 House Democrats who opposed the measure still lost their re-election, opposing a controversial bill is not enough to inoculate lawmakers in wave election years.
“The wave starts in those districts whether they voted for or against the tax bill,” said former Democratic Representative Steve Israel of New York, calling this moment “political déjà vu.”
Notably, the House Republicans who opposed the bill also will not be the beneficiaries of the Super PAC’s spending.
“We’re going to focus on those who kept their promise to their constituents,” said Corry Bliss, who runs the group.
Veteran Republicans are sober about how daunting 2018 is shaping up to be, and hope that a clash on taxes at the very least offers the prospect of shifting the political debate onto more favorable terrain.
“If you’re a Republican and you think about what’s coming, and the range of things you could be fighting about, to have a fight about this tax bill is among the better things they can fight over in 2018,” said Bill McInturff, a G.O.P. pollster, conceding that Republicans are facing “very tough numbers.”
Mr. McInturff, who recently conducted a survey showing Republicans trailing Democrats by 12 points on the so-called generic ballot, said his party could not change the minds of those with fixed views about Mr. Trump, but that the tax bill offered an argument for those willing to hear them out.
“You better have something to say that the 60 percent is willing to listen to,” he said, noting polls that show 40 percent of voters want to impeach Mr. Trump.
Mr. Stivers acknowledged the partisan preferences of voters at the moment were tilting away from Republicans. “Right now there are people that don’t like the president, and they’re expressing it in that way,” he said of the generic ballot. But he suggested that voters uneasy with the president are still willing to support Republican congressional candidates, pointing to the Atlanta-area special House election the party won earlier this year despite a massive influx of money for the Democrats.
And he said he had urged his members to make taxes central. “Everybody needs to be talking about the tax bill, what it means for their communities,” said Mr. Stivers.
Democrats, though, said no piece of legislation could address the depth of the Republican challenge.
“It is unfixable,” said Anna Greenberg, a Democratic pollster. “And by November, tax reform could be a nonissue because what’s driving people to come out to vote is they don’t like the way the country is being run and the comportment of the president.”Continue reading the main story"
frame of article is: government
###
article: "Republican lawmakers say that one of the largest tax cuts in their tax bill, a 20 percent deduction for pass-through income, is for small businesses and job creators. But there are also millions of other tax filers — many at the highest income levels — who would benefit significantly.
Taxpayers with
pass-through income
40m
Businesses
19m
Non-business
entities
21m
Small
businesses
17m
Large
businesses
2m
Non-employers
14m
Employers
4m
Taxpayers with
pass-through income
40m
Businesses
19m
Non-business
entities
21m
Small
businesses
17m
Large
businesses
2m
Non-
employers
14m
Employers
4m
Pass-through income is business income that is taxed once at the individual rates of the business owner, instead of through the corporate tax structure. Nearly 40 million taxpayers claimed pass-through income on their individual tax returns for 2014.
Some Republicans pushed to include the cuts in the bill so that pass-throughs, which make up more than 95 percent of business tax filings, will get similar tax relief as corporations, which are receiving a large rate cut. Here are some examples of taxpayers who might claim pass-through income:
IT specialist
Law firm partner
Real estate investor
House painter
Pizza shop owner
While “pass-throughs” is a term often used to refer to small businesses, a Treasury Department analysis found that many are not actually businesses at all. And 69 percent of pass-through income goes to the top one percent of households.
Pass-throughs
40m
Non-businesses
21m
Businesses
19m
Pass-throughs
40m
Non-businesses
21m
Businesses
19m
Less than half of all people who claim pass-through business income on their tax returns conduct traditional business activity, according to the Treasury analysis.
Some “non-business” pass-throughs claim a small amount of income or losses, indicating that they may be claiming earnings from hobbies or vacation home rentals, for example. Others deduct a small amount of expenses and are most likely to be independent contractors who solely provide labor services, like an IT specialist who operates as a sole proprietor and contracts with another company.
Because pass-through rates will be lower than rates for individual income taxes, the bill would provide an incentive for people to find ways to classify their earnings as business income to take advantage of the lower rates.
For example, a journalist could cease to be a direct employee of a company and then contract as a sole proprietor with that same company to benefit from the pass-through tax deduction (though, they would have to pay for their benefits and more of their own payroll taxes).
The bill includes some limits on who can take the deduction, but they would begin to kick in at $157,500 in taxable income for singles and $315,000 for couples. Most “non-business” pass-through filers make less than that and would qualify for the full 20 percent deduction.
Pass-throughs
40m
Large
businesses
2m
Small
businesses
17m
Pass-throughs
40m
Large
businesses
2m
Small
businesses
17m
The vast majority of pass-through businesses are small, defined as having total income and total deductions of less than $10 million each. But there are a handful of very large pass-throughs, including law firms, hedge funds and multibillion-dollar businesses like Georgia-Pacific (a Koch Industries subsidiary) and Fidelity Investments, that claim an outsized share of pass-through income.
The bill sets limits for how much people with high incomes can deduct. People in professional service industries, like partners in law firms, are the most restricted; the deduction would begin to phase out for those people who earn more than $315,000 for couples and $157,500 for singles.
For high-earners in other industries, the bill would use a calculation to cap their deduction. The limit would be set at whichever was higher — 50 percent of total wages paid or 25 percent of wages plus 2.5 percent of cost of tangible depreciable property.
This means that a pass-through that pays a large amount of employee wages would be able to take more of a deduction than one that pays a small amount. Pass-throughs in capital intensive industries like real estate, including the companies that make up the Trump Organization, would also be able to deduct more, and would benefit significantly from the bill.
Pass-throughs
40m
Non-
employers
14m
Employers
4m
Pass-throughs
40m
Non-
employers
14m
Employers
4m
Of the pass-through businesses that are considered small, most are self-employed individuals with no employees. More than three quarters were categorized as non-employers in the Treasury analysis because they claimed less than $10,000 in deductions for labor.
Examples of these businesses include a small-town accountant or a house painter who does not employ anyone else but meets the analysis’ definition of a business owner because he deducts a large amount of expenses for things like office space and supplies.
Ultimately, 10 percent of all individuals claiming pass-through income were considered small-business employers in the Treasury analysis. Examples include a local dry cleaner who employs a few family members or a pizza shop owner with a dozen employees.
More than 70 percent of small-business employers had adjusted gross income below $200,000, so many of them would be eligible for the full 20 percent deduction for pass-through income.
Some Republican lawmakers argued that the tax bill should reduce rates for pass-through entities as it reduces corporate tax rates. But many economists say that pass-throughs already have a preferential tax structure.
While the top income tax rate for corporations would fall to 21 percent under the bill, it’s not directly comparable to the top pass-through rate, which would effectively fall to 29.6 percent with the deduction. Corporations are taxed twice, first on income and then on returns to investors, resulting in a higher tax burden overall. And if pass-through businesses determined that their tax burden would be lower under the bill if they organized as a corporation, they could choose to do so."
frame of article is: government
###
article: "Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) released a massive economic stimulus bill Thursday to fight the coronavirus’s fallout, even as opposition emerged from some key Republicans to one of the central elements of the plan — direct cash payments to many Americans.
President Trump has expressed support for the cash payment approach in recent days, but he has also shifted between numerous ideas amid waves of opposition.
Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.), a close ally of the president’s, was among several GOP senators voicing concern or outright opposition Thursday to the idea of direct payments, even as McConnell unveiled the trillion-dollar stimulus plan that would be the starting point for negotiations with Democrats. McConnell called for those talks to start Friday, and senators said the situation was so dire that they should not recess until they have reached a deal to pass it.
“We are facing the abyss,” said Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.). “We are facing circumstances for which there is no playbook.”
A number of economists have predicted that the U.S. economy is plunging into a recession and that the unemployment rate could soar because many Americans are staying home out of fear of catching the virus. Many businesses are struggling to pay their bills and are laying off workers. The travel industry has been hit particularly hard, but more and more companies are now raising the alarm.
The centerpiece of the Senate GOP plan — building on a proposal revealed Wednesday by the Treasury Department — would be hundreds of billions of dollars sent to Americans in the form of checks as a way to flood the country with money in an effort to blunt the dramatic pullback of spending that has resulted from the coronavirus outbreak.
The legislation would provide checks of $1,200 per adult for many families, as well as $500 for every child in those families. Families filing jointly would receive up to $2,400 for the adults. The size of the checks would diminish for those earning more than $75,000 and phase out completely for those earning more than $99,000. The poorest families, those with no federal income tax liability, would see smaller benefits, though the minimum would be set at $600.
Limiting the payment amount for those without federal tax liability was a change from the original White House proposal, and caught some Republicans off-guard, provoking criticism. Sen. Josh Hawley (R-Mo.) tweeted: “Relief to families in this emergency shouldn’t be regressive. Lower income families shouldn’t be penalized.”
An early analysis showed the vast majority of middle class people would receive the cash payment, but the percentage doing so falls dramatically toward the bottom of the income distribution. About 22 million people earning under $40,000 a year would see no benefit under the GOP plan, according to an initial analysis by Ernie Tedeschi, a former Obama administration economist.
The precise design of the payments had remained fluid as talks on Capitol Hill continued, with lawmakers racing to finalize the legislation. The emerging opposition to the direct payments underscored that key elements of the plan could be very much subject to change — especially since it still must be negotiated with Democrats in both chambers of Congress.
As the administration tries to get ahead of the cascading impacts of the coronavirus, Trump already shifted course once this week, abandoning for now a proposed payroll tax cut in favor of the direct payments, which he said could have a faster impact. Some of his allies, though, are not convinced.
“Direct payments make sense when an economy is beginning to restart. Makes no sense now, because it’s just money. What I want is income, not one check. I want you to get a check you count on every week, not one week,” Graham told reporters, adding that he was about to speak with newly named White House chief of staff Mark Meadows to share his views.
Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Richard C. Shelby (R-Ala.) also voiced opposition to direct cash payments.
“I personally think that if we are going to help people, we ought to direct the cash payments maybe as a supplement to unemployment, not to the people that are still working every day,” Shelby said. “You know, just a blanket cash check to everybody in America that’s making up to $75,000, I don’t know the logic of that.”
Often, congressional leaders will try to get broad support for legislation before introducing it, but many are now rushing to complete a bill, given the growing fears about the economy’s downward trajectory.
Still, the newly voiced opposition to cash payments added to uncertainty about how quickly Congress would be able to finalize the giant stimulus plan that all parties agree is needed as the coronavirus overtakes American life and the economy. Democrats were working on their own proposals, which shun corporate loan programs being included by Republicans — such as $50 billion for airlines — suggesting that there will be difficulty in reaching bipartisan agreement.
Meanwhile the crisis is worsening. Confirmed covid-19 cases in the United States rose past 11,000 on Thursday — including two members of the House, Reps. Mario Diaz-Balart (R-Fla.) and Ben McAdams (D-Utah), bringing the crisis closer to home for lawmakers.
And the details of the big stimulus package keep changing. Trump himself embraced another idea, saying he supports having the federal government take equity stakes in private companies that receive coronavirus bailout funds.
Trump made the comment in response to a question at a briefing of his coronavirus response team, and suggested that different companies could be treated differently on the basis of past behavior. For example, Trump said that companies that have been using excess cash to buy back their stock in recent years — effectively boosting their stock prices instead of investing in new equipment — might be treated more harshly than others.
“I do, I really do,” Trump said, asked whether he would like to see the federal government take a stake in private companies. The federal government took equity stakes, effectively a type of ownership position, in certain companies that were bailed out during the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009. It’s a way of protecting taxpayer investments in firms and ensuring that taxpayers potentially benefit when a company recovers. But the approach is controversial because it essentially involves partial government ownership of private companies.
Questions about how this would work have grown in recent days as more companies and industries plead with the White House and Congress for large amounts of assistance as their operations have been disrupted in recent weeks.
“People are coming in for money. In some cases, no fault of their own,” Trump said, adding that “in some cases, where they did certain things over the course of the years, including by buying back stock, you know, they bought back stock and they paid a high price for it. ... But maybe I view that as a little bit differently than somebody that didn’t and somebody that built plants all over the United States.”
The legislation McConnell released Thursday was based on what he called four “pillars” – payments to small businesses, direct cash payments to individuals, loans to industries decimated by the virus, and a surge in funding to the health-care industry.
The small-business section, which Rubio led, offers loans to small businesses with under 500 employees. The $300 billion for the loans would be made available through lenders certified by the Small Business Administration, such as banks and credit unions, with the maximum loan capped at $10 million. The portion of the loan used by the small businesses to cover their payrolls could be forgiven if firms retain their employees through the end of June 30, 2020. Loans given to firms with tipped employees, such as bars and restaurants, could be forgiven if they are used to provide additional wages to their employees.
The bill also outlines in greater detail the terms for receiving targeted federal help from the federal government, as proposed earlier by the Trump administration. The legislation includes $50 billion in “loans and loan guarantees” for passenger airlines; $8 billion for “cargo air carriers”; and $150 billion for other “eligible businesses,” a category administration officials have suggested could include the hotel and cruise industries. The legislation appears to give the Treasury Department wide authority in determining which businesses qualify for this $150 billion fund.
Democrats have demanded that any firms receiving bailout funding implement reforms such as a $15 minimum wage and an end to stock buybacks. The GOP legislation says that no “officer or employee” of a firm receiving an emergency loan can receive an increase compensation above $425,000 until after March 1, 2022.
“We’re not talking about so-called bailouts for firms that made reckless decisions,” McConnell said. “None of these firms, not corner stores, not pizza parlors, not airlines, brought this on themselves. We’re not talking about a taxpayer-funded cushion for companies that made mistakes. We’re talking about loans which must be repaid.”
Trump’s $1 trillion stimulus is a gamble for reelection — and a sea change for Republicans once opposed to bailouts
Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) has offered his own plan, which skews more toward workers than corporations. And House Democrats, wary of being sidelined as the stimulus bill is negotiated between the White House and Senate Republicans, are trying to assert their power by proposing their own sweeping coronavirus economic rescue package in the coming days.
Schumer and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) said in a joint statement Thursday that Democrats were “united in our commitment” to prioritize worker and health-care concerns.
“That means taking bold action to help workers and small businesses first by greatly increasing unemployment insurance and Medicaid, making massive investments to help small businesses survive, expanding paid sick and family leave, and putting money directly into the hands of those who need it most,” they said.
On a conference calls of Democratic lawmakers Thursday, House committee chairs outlined a litany of legislative proposals — though the fine details were far from resolved and Pelosi offered no firm deadline to finalize a unified rescue plan.
On cash payments, for instance, House Ways and Means Chairman Richard E. Neal (D-Mass.) and Financial Services Committee Chairwoman Maxine Waters (D-Calif.) have outlined dueling proposals, while other Democrats have focused on beefing up existing safety net programs — such as unemployment insurance and Medicaid — as providing more targeted and effective relief.
— Seung Min Kim contributed to this report
Coronavirus: What you need to know
Vaccines: The CDC recommends that everyone age 5 and older get an updated covid booster shot. New federal data shows adults who received the updated shots cut their risk of being hospitalized with covid-19 by 50 percent. Here’s guidance on when you should get the omicron booster and how vaccine efficacy could be affected by your prior infections.
New covid variant: The XBB.1.5 variant is a highly transmissible descendant of omicron that is now estimated to cause about half of new infections in the country. We answered some frequently asked questions about the bivalent booster shots.
Guidance: CDC guidelines have been confusing — if you get covid, here’s how to tell when you’re no longer contagious. We’ve also created a guide to help you decide when to keep wearing face coverings.
Where do things stand? See the latest coronavirus numbers in the U.S. and across the world. In the U.S., pandemic trends have shifted and now White people are more likely to die from covid than Black people. Nearly nine out of 10 covid deaths are people over the age 65.
For the latest news, sign up for our free newsletter."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Fed Could Pencil in Higher Interest Rates Next Year While Slowing Hikes in December
Brisk wage growth could lead officials to consider raising their policy rate above 5% in 2023 to fight inflation
Federal Reserve officials have signaled plans to raise their benchmark interest rate by 0.5 percentage point at their meeting next week, but elevated wage pressures could lead them to continue lifting it to higher levels than investors currently expect.
They have raised rates this year at the fastest pace since the early 1980s, including by 0.75 point at each of their past four meetings to combat inflation. Fed Chair Jerome Powell indicated last week that the central bank was prepared to downshift the size of rate increases at its coming meeting on Dec. 13-14.
Continue reading your article with
View Membership Options
a WSJ membership
Already a member? Sign In
Sponsored Offers
-
GoPro:
Student Discount - $100 off the GoPro HERO11
-
Samsung:
Save up to 40% + free shipping - Samsung coupon code
-
Dell:
Save up to 30% + free shipping with Dell coupons
-
The Motley Fool:
New members save 55% on Stock Advisor
-
Wayfair:
Up to 15% off + free shipping at Wayfair
-
American Eagle Outfitters:
Sign up for emails and get 10% off American Eagle promo code
Most Popular News
-
In Georgia, Midterm Turnout and Blank Ballots Might Reveal Who Has the Edge
-
How Nascar Turned This Lakefront Community Into One of America’s Hottest Luxury Housing Markets
-
The Hotel Inside the Bass Pro Shops Inside the Pyramid
-
Sam Bankman-Fried Says He Can’t Account for Billions Sent to Alameda
-
Apple Makes Plans to Move Production Out of China"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Donald Trump Says He’s ‘Not Happy’ About Federal Reserve Interest-Rate Increases
Comments break with tradition that presidents refrain from commenting on monetary policy
President Donald Trump delivered a rare presidential critique of the Federal Reserve, saying he hoped the central bank would stop raising interest rates.
“I am not happy about it,” Mr. Trump said about interest-rate increases, in an interview Thursday with CNBC.
Related
- Fed’s Powell Presents Lawmakers With a Charm Offensive (July 16)
- A Brief History of the Federal Reserve’s Independence (June 13)
- Fed Raises Interest Rates, Sets Stage for Two More Increases in 2018 (June 13)
- A Brief History of White House Officials Trying to Jawbone the Fed (June 6)
- Fed Raises Interest Rates, Remains on Track to Keep Tightening (March 15)
- Fed’s Powell Says Central Banks Can’t Take Independence for Granted (May 25)
- Jerome Powell Sworn In as Federal Reserve Chairman (Feb. 5)
- President Trump Says Jerome Powell Is His Choice to Lead Federal Reserve (Nov. 2, 2017)
- Donald Trump Attacks Federal Reserve, Yellen During Debate (Sept. 26, 2016)
His comments departed from a convention in which presidents have refrained from speaking specifically on monetary policy.
The Fed raised its benchmark rate twice this year, in March and in June, to a range between 1.75% and 2%. Central bank officials have penciled in two more rate increases this year.
Fed Chairman Jerome Powell was tapped by Mr. Trump last November to succeed Janet Yellen, and he took his post in February.
Mr. Trump, a Republican, said he was “not thrilled” because every time the economy strengthens “they want to raise rates again.” But he said he wouldn’t interfere with the Fed. “I’m letting them do what they feel is best,” he said.
Mr. Trump also called Mr. Powell a “very good man” in the portion of the interview that aired Thursday.
Analysts said Mr. Trump’s comments were unlikely to sway the Fed’s rate-setting decisions, and if anything, they could backfire by forcing the central bank to affirm its independence. Marc Sumerlin, managing partner at economic consulting firm Evenflow Macro, said the already-high likelihood of a rate increase in September had climbed higher after Mr. Trump’s remarks.
“If the president publicly tells a Fed chair to stop, they have to keep going,” said Mr. Sumerlin, who served as an adviser to former President George W. Bush. “Trump’s being counterproductive to his own goal because any time a president says publicly to stop, a central bank can’t.”
Even if the president’s unhappiness doesn’t influence the Fed, the comments risk calling the Fed’s independence into question if the central bank, on its own, concluded it needed to slow its gradual pace of rate increases, analysts said.
Central bankers have long argued for independence from political pressure. They said it gives investors greater confidence that officials will make unpopular decisions in the long-run best interest of the economy—such as raising rates to curb inflation—as former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker did in the early 1980s.
Political pressure on former Fed chairmen William McChesney Martin by the Johnson administration and on Arthur Burns by the Nixon administration to follow easy-money policies is widely blamed for the inflation surges of the 1970s.
The Fed is charged by Congress to maximize employment and maintain stable prices, and its leadership today seeks inflation of 2% because it sees that level as reflecting a healthy economy.
With the economy expanding solidly and the unemployment rate falling to its lowest levels in decades, the central bank has been gradually raising rates from historically very low levels to keep growth on an even keel.
Both of the Fed’s rate increases this year have been approved unanimously. Mr. Trump has filled two of seven seats on the Fed’s board of governors, which has four vacancies. The Senate hasn’t yet confirmed Mr. Trump’s three additional nominees, all of whom have said they won’t allow political considerations to influence their decision-making.
The upshot is that Mr. Trump has few means to directly influence the Fed. If all the president’s remaining nominees were confirmed, he would have only one vacancy left to fill on the board.
Fed governors serve fixed terms and cannot be removed from office by the president because of a policy dispute.
Former Fed Vice Chairman Donald Kohn, now at the Brookings Institution, said he didn’t expect Mr. Trump’s comments Thursday to influence Mr. Powell, who goes by Jay. “I’m completely confident that the Fed, under Jay’s leadership, will continue to do whatever is necessary to achieve its dual mandate,” he said.
A Fed spokeswoman declined to comment Thursday.
The president, who has previously expressed support for a weaker dollar, said he was frustrated that rising interest rates had caused the U.S. dollar to strengthen against other currencies.
Europe’s “making money easy, and their currency is falling,” Mr. Trump told CNBC. “China, their currency is dropping like a rock. Our currency is going up. I have to tell you, it puts us at a disadvantage.”
A stronger greenback makes U.S. exports relatively more expensive on world markets.
The dollar weakened slightly against other major currencies when CNBC aired Mr. Trump’s remarks, with the WSJ Dollar Index moving lower shortly after 1 p.m. EDT. It later recouped some of those losses.
Mr. Powell, who hasn’t met with or spoken to Mr. Trump since his confirmation, said last week he wasn’t worried about political pressure from the White House.
“We have a long tradition here of conducting policy … independent of all political concerns. Wedo our work in a strictly nonpolitical way, based on detailed analysis, which we put on the record transparently,” Mr. Powell said in an interview with American Public Media’s “Marketplace” radio program.
The nonpolitical approach “is deep in our DNA,” Mr. Powell added.
The Fed cut its benchmark rate to near zero to boost demand after the 2008 financial crisis, and it held the rate there far longer than many observers expected. Officials began to gradually lift rates in late 2015. Last fall, the central bank also began to slowly shrink the $4.3 trillion bond portfolio it amassed during several rounds of asset purchases designed to lower long-term rates and further stimulate growth.
While former President Ronald Reagan was reluctant to publicly question Mr. Volcker, his White House frequently criticized Fed policy and nominated several governors who outvoted Mr. Volcker, a rare rebuke.
Former President George H.W. Bush, when he was vice president and seeking the presidency in 1988, fretted publicly that the Fed might take steps to slow the economy. Some White House officials blamed Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan for not cutting rates quickly enough after the 1990-91 recession, which they thought cost Mr. Bush his 1992 re-election bid.
In 1993, a top adviser to then-President Bill Clinton began enforcing a rule within the White House that the Fed’s policy decisions shouldn’t be publicly questioned. That rule largely held under the administrations of George W. Bush and Barack Obama. It also was followed until this year in Mr. Trump’s White House.
Former White House economic adviser Gary Cohn emphasized to colleagues the importance to markets of not publicly second-guessing monetary policy decisions. He left the White House in April.
After a portion of Mr. Trump’s interview aired on Thursday, a White House spokeswoman issued a statement that read in part, “Of course the president respects the independence of the Fed.”
Mr. Trump said during the interview that he knew some people didn’t think it was appropriate for the president to comment on interest rates or the dollar, but he said of those concerns, “I couldn’t care less what they say.”
At a conference in Sweden earlier this year, Mr. Powell said an erosion of trust in public institutions had created special challenges for central banks. Those institutions “cannot take our measure of independence for granted,” he said.
Write to Nick Timiraos at nick.timiraos@wsj.com
Appeared in the July 20, 2018, print edition as 'Breaking Custom, Trump Raps Fed.'
Most Popular Videos
Most Popular Articles
-
Trump Aides Did Damage Control on Air Force One After Putin Meeting
-
First Test Drive of the Tesla Model 3 Performance: A Thrilling, Modern Marvel
-
Trump Criticizes Fed Rate Rises in Break With Policy Custom
-
Holy Director’s Cut, Batman! ‘Justice League’ Fans Demand New Version of a Superhero Flop
-
A Nearly Century-Old Steam Pipe Explodes in Manhattan"
frame of article is: government
###
article: "WASHINGTON — The Federal Reserve said Wednesday that the United States economy was slowing more than it had previously thought and painted a far less rosy economic picture than the White House as it left interest rates unchanged and signaled little appetite for raising them again in the near future.
Jerome H. Powell, the Fed chairman, said the economy “is in a good place” in a news conference. But he and his colleagues said growth appeared to be slowing from last year, under the weight of the Trump administration’s trade war, economic slowdowns in Europe and China and fading stimulus from the Republican tax cuts of 2017.
The Fed now expects 2.1 percent growth this year, down from the 2.3 percent it forecast in December — and more than a percentage point less than the 3.2 percent growth the White House predicts. The outlook for 2020 is even more bleak, with the Fed now projecting growth of just 1.9 percent.
The downbeat assessment comes as the Fed sees signs of weakness in areas like consumer spending and business investment, which Mr. Powell said “suggest that growth is slowing somewhat more than expected.” Average monthly job growth, while strong, “appears to have stepped down from last year’s strong pace,” he added.
Mr. Powell tried to reassure markets by saying “economical fundamentals are still very strong,” but he acknowledged that recent developments both domestically and abroad were making it harder for the American economy to grow as quickly as it did last year.
“We see a situation where the European economy has slowed substantially,” he said, adding that China’s economy has also weakened.
Forecasts released at the end of the two-day meeting show the typical member of the Federal Open Market Committee now expects not to raise rates at all this year, an abrupt halt to what had been five consecutive quarters of rate increases to the current range of 2.25 to 2.5 percent. Most officials now expect a single rate increase in 2020 and none in 2021. In December, when forecasts were last released, Fed officials said they expected two rate increases this year and another in 2020.
Mr. Powell showed little concern about inflation — which has stayed below the Fed’s 2 percent target — rising to levels that would trigger an immediate rate increase in order to prevent a rapid escalation of prices across the economy.
Instead, Mr. Powell did not rule out the possibility — based on the current condition of the economy — that the central bank’s next move could be a rate cut. “The data are not currently sending a signal that we need to move in one direction or another,” he said.
By signaling it will not raise rates without a clear change in conditions, the Fed is effectively giving Mr. Trump what he wants from monetary policy, but with a twist. The president has publicly pushed Mr. Powell to stop raising rates. But if the Fed is correct and growth falls well below 3 percent this year, without a single rate increase, it will be difficult for Mr. Trump to pin the blame on Mr. Powell.
The 1.9 percent growth the Fed now expects in 2020 is down from a 2 percent forecast in December. But the projections include even worse possibilities: At least one committee member forecasts growth of only 1.6 percent for 2019. In December, the lowest forecast was 2 percent for the year.
White House officials see growth staying above 3 percent for the next few years, provided Mr. Trump can continue implementing his economic agenda, including another round of tax cuts, a $1 trillion infrastructure plan and additional deregulation.
Most private forecasters’ growth predictions for this year run closer to the Fed’s than the White House’s. That includes the chief executives of the Business Roundtable, who said in a quarterly survey released Wednesday that their expectations for sales, hiring and investment fell at the start of the year. They predict the economy will grow 2.5 percent in 2019.
The gap between White House and Fed forecasts has never been wider in the years since the Great Recession ended in 2009. The two outlooks have clashed in the past — during the terms of Presidents George Bush and George W. Bush — for fundamental reasons, said Diane Swonk, the chief economist at Grant Thornton.
“One is a forecast that is meant to be as accurate as possible and produce the best monetary policy outcomes,” Ms. Swonk said. “The other is a forecast that can’t escape political and ideological desires.”
The diverging forecasts underscore the differences in how the administration and the Fed judge both the risks to economic growth this year and the evidence that Mr. Trump’s tax cuts have fundamentally strengthened the economy.
Administration officials insist that the $1.5 trillion tax cut will continue to accelerate business investment and draw more and more workers into the labor force, accelerating growth. Mr. Trump promoted his economic plan in Lima, Ohio, on Wednesday, saying it would produce record job and wage growth.
“We just came out, another chart, we just came out with numbers, the economic report of the president, 3.1 percent G.D.P., the first time in 14 years,” Mr. Trump said, referring to data showing economic output rose 3.1 percent in the fourth quarter of 2018 from a year earlier. While the Fed expressed concern that Mr. Trump’s trade policies could drag down growth, the president said his tariffs on imported metals and Chinese goods were bringing jobs back to America.
“Everyone said you couldn’t do it, you couldn’t bring back manufacturing jobs,” he said. “You would need a magic wand. We are bringing them back beyond anybody’s expectations.”
Mr. Powell said on Wednesday that it was difficult to discern the law’s permanent effects on the supply of workers and productivity.
“We hope they’re very large,” he said.
Asked about the Fed’s deviation from the White House’s economic growth projections that were released on Tuesday, Mr. Powell said he had not seen those numbers.
“The Fed underscored patience and a strong desire to allow inflation to run above target,” researchers at Bank of America Merrill Lynch said in a research note. “As Powell said in his opening remarks, the Fed’s overarching goal is to sustain the economic expansion. This unprecedented dovish turn clearly shows such commitment.”
Yields on the 10-year Treasury note — a bellwether for a range of consumer borrowing rates — dropped sharply after the Fed statement was released as investors digested the potential that the Fed could be done raising rates for some time. The yield on the 10-year Treasury fell to 2.52 percent — its lowest level since January 2018. Stocks, which had been negative for most of the day, rallied and briefly regained positive territory after the announcement. However, they lost steam in the last hour of trading, and the S&P 500 closed down 0.3 percent.
Analysts had been expecting the Fed to shift its forecasts at the meeting, but not by this much.
Eleven committee members said they do not expect any rate increases this year. Four said they expected one. None expected a rate cut. In 2020, a majority of members expected at least one rate increase, although some expected none.
Fed officials also announced that they would end an effort to slim the central bank’s massive holdings of government-backed securities in September, after slowing it down in May. The Fed accumulated $4.5 trillion worth of Treasury and mortgage-backed securities in an effort to stimulate the economy after the Great Recession. It has been slowly winnowing those holdings as the economy has recovered.
Many analysts had expected officials to announce the September end of the balance sheet wind-down, which Mr. Powell had foreshadowed in a recent speech at Stanford University. By October, the Fed said on Wednesday, officials will be shifting the composition of the balance sheet, moving out of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities and into primarily Treasury bonds.
Officials appeared to hasten to end the balance sheet reduction under pressure from financial markets. Many analysts blamed stock market volatility in December and January on the Fed’s wind-down process.
In announcing the end of the reduction, Fed officials acknowledged that they were stopping short of what many analysts had expected when the reduction began. They said the total holdings on the balance sheet once the wind-down ends “will likely still be somewhat above the level of reserves necessary to efficiently and effectively implement monetary policy.”
Carrying a larger-than-expected balance sheet — and operating with interest rates at what remain historically low levels — could hinder the Fed in battling an economic downturn in the near future."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Fed Faces Mixed Signals as Hiring Cooled in August
U.S. payrolls rose by 151,000 last month, while jobless rate held steady at 4.9%
WASHINGTON—Hiring cooled in August but remained consistent with steady U.S. job growth capable of holding down unemployment, leaving Federal Reserve policy makers to interpret mixed signals.
Nonfarm payrolls rose by a seasonally adjusted 151,000 last month, the Labor Department said Friday. The unemployment rate, calculated from a separate survey of American households, was 4.9% in August, unchanged from July. Economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal had expected employers would add 180,000 jobs and forecast an unemployment rate of 4.8%.
More
- Analysis: Mixed Signals for September Meeting
- Recap: August Jobs Report
- August Jobs Report, by the Numbers
- The Jobs Report in 15 Charts
- U.S. Stocks Rise After Jobs Report
- Signal From the Markets: A Middling Jobs Report Is a Good Jobs Report
- Economists React: ‘Hiring Fell Back to Earth’
- Jobs Report No Boon for Either Candidate
The August payroll gain was a slowdown from the more than 270,000 jobs added in each of the prior two months. But many economists expected moderating growth, believing the economy is nearing full employment. U.S. employers added enough jobs to absorb most new entrants into the labor, keeping the unemployment rate in the range most Fed policy makers view as the longer-term average. Economists surveyed by the Journal earlier this year estimated on average the U.S. only needed to add 145,000 jobs each month to keep up with growth in the labor force.
The latest data is the last broad measure of the labor market that Fed officials will see before meeting on Sept. 20-21. The figures could spark a vigorous discussion between policy makers who see the economy as healthy enough to absorb a rate increase and those concerned about low inflation, middling economic growth and uncertainty from the presidential election and global turmoil.
“While the report is solid,” said Quincy Krosby, Market Strategist at Prudential Financial. “It falls short of providing a resounding vote for a September move by the Fed.”
Several economists noted Friday that the August payroll figure often comes in below forecasts and then is revised up in subsequent months. That further complicates the decision in front of the Fed in less than three weeks.
“Even if Fed officials are suspicious, they will want to wait another couple of months to ensure the data does rebound in September and that August is revised higher,” said Capital Economics economist Paul Ashworth.
There are worrisome signs outside the job market. U.S. economic growth has held near 1% for three straight quarters, anemic gains even by the standards of the lackluster expansion. Business investment has decreased this year, corporate profits are soft and threats from economic weakness abroad still loom.
Friday’s report produced a mixed picture on wages as well. Average hourly earnings for private-sector workers rose by 3 cents, or 0.1%, in August from July to $25.73. Earnings were up 2.4% from a year earlier. That could suggest the sub-5% unemployment rate is putting modest upward pressure on wages.
But annual growth slowed from 2.7% the prior month, the best gain in seven years. The slower growth could reflect the mix of hiring in August tilting toward typically lower-paying fields.
Employment at restaurants grew by a seasonally adjusted 34,000; retailers added 15,100 jobs; social-assistance jobs grew by 21,700. In contrast, there were job cuts in often better paying fields. The manufacturing sector shed 14,000 jobs. Employment in both the mining sector, which includes the oil and gas industry, and the construction sector also shrank in August.
The government added 25,000 jobs last month, and the private-service sector grew by 150,000.
U.S. employers have added jobs at a 182,000 monthly pace so far this year. That is down from average gains in 2015 and 2014—the best two years for employment growth since 1999—but consistent with average growth over the past two economic expansions.
In some ways, the labor market may be finding its level. After falling during most of the expansion, the unemployment rate has been little changed this year. The labor-force participation rate held steady at 62.8% in August. The rate has inched up slightly since touching a four-decade low of 62.4% in September 2015.
Another measure of unemployment and underemployment, including Americans who are working part time because they can’t find full-time jobs, also held steady at 9.7% in August. That rate has changed little this year, and remains elevated relative to previous periods when the unemployment rate was below 5%.
The average workweek last month decreased by 0.1 hour to 34.3 hours.
The health of the labor market, and the broader economy, is an important issue in the U.S. presidential election.
Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton’s campaign in part is based on President Barack Obama’s record, which includes consistent job creation since late 2010, after the economy emerged from a deep recession. Mrs. Clinton has said, if elected, she would boost jobs though investment in infrastructure and green technology.
Republican Donald Trump often points out the current expansion features the weakest average annual growth of any since World War II. He says his trade and tax policies will lead to more high-paying jobs for Americans.
Write to Eric Morath at eric.morath@wsj.com and Anna Louie Sussman at anna.sussman@wsj.com"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Big oil companies endured one of their worst second quarters ever and are positioning themselves for prolonged pain as the coronavirus pandemic continues to sap global demand for fossil fuels.
Exxon Mobil Corp. posted a quarterly loss for the second straight quarter for the first time this century on Friday, reporting a loss of $1.1 billion, compared with a profit of $3.1 billion a year ago. Exxon, the largest U.S. oil company, hadn’t reported back-to-back losses for at least 22 years, according to Dow Jones Market Data, whose figures extend to 1998.
“The global pandemic and oversupply conditions significantly impacted our second-quarter financial results with lower prices, margins, and sales volumes,” Exxon Chief Executive Darren Woods said.
Chevron Corp. said Friday it lost $8.3 billion in the second quarter, down from $4.3 billion in profits during the same period last year, its largest loss since at least 1998. It wrote down $5.7 billion in oil-and-gas properties, including $2.6 billion in Venezuela, citing uncertainty in the country ruled by strongman Nicolás Maduro. Chevron also said it lowered its internal estimates for future commodity prices.
Royal Dutch Shell PLC and Total SA reported significant losses in the second quarter earlier this week, as the impact of the pandemic and a worsening long-term outlook for commodity prices spurred them to write down the value of their assets.
Newsletter Sign-up
The 10-Point.
A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal.
The dismal results are ratcheting up the problems for the oil giants, which were struggling to attract investors even before the pandemic, as concerns over climate-change regulations and increasing competition from renewable energy and electric vehicles cloud the future for fossil fuels.
Holdings of oil-and-gas stocks by active money managers are at a 15-year low, according to investment bank Evercore ISI. BP PLC, Shell and Total are all trading at 30-year lows relative to the overall S&P 500. Exxon is trading at its lowest level to the S&P 500 since 1977, according to the bank.
Many of the big oil companies have sought to retain investors despite slowing growth and profits over the past decade by paying out hefty dividends, but those payouts are proving hard to sustain during the pandemic.
STAY INFORMED
Get a coronavirus briefing six days a week, and a weekly Health newsletter once the crisis abates: Sign up here.
Crude prices have stabilized at around $40 a barrel, providing modest relief for the industry after U.S. oil prices briefly turned negative for the first time ever in April. But none of the world’s largest oil companies now foresee a rapid recovery as countries continue to struggle with containing the coronavirus.
Chevron CEO Mike Wirth said his company faced an uncertain future for energy demand and couldn’t predict commodity prices with confidence right now.
“We expect a choppy economy and a choppy market,” Mr. Wirth said in an interview earlier in July. “It all depends on the virus and the policies enacted to respond to it.”
Oil and gas production by both Exxon and Chevron decreased in the quarter, down 7% and 3%, respectively, from a year ago, as the companies shut off wells to avoid selling into a weak market. Exxon’s production-and-exploration business lost $1.7 billion, which Exxon attributed to lower commodity prices. Chevron’s production unit lost $6.1 billion.
U.S. oil prices closed below $40 per barrel Thursday for the first time in three weeks.
For the entire second quarter, U.S. oil prices averaged $28 per barrel and Brent crude averaged about $33, according to Dow Jones Market Data, prices at which even the largest oil companies struggle to turn a profit, analysts say.
While major stock indexes have recovered from April, when they fell to their lowest levels in years, oil and gas stocks have continued to lag despite the slight rebound in commodity prices.
Many of the world’s largest energy companies, including Exxon and Chevron, have for years used an integrated business model, which has historically allowed them to weather most market conditions.
By owning oil and gas wells, along with the downstream plants to manufacture refined products like gasoline and chemicals, the companies were long able to capitalize in one sector of their business, regardless of whether oil prices were high or low.
But that model has failed to deliver strong returns for most of the past decade, as the world has faced a glut of fossil fuels triggered in part by America’s fracking boom, and it isn’t protecting the companies now, according to Evercore ISI analyst Doug Terreson.
“A broad-based reassessment of the capital-management programs at the big oils is required at this point,” Mr. Terreson said.
Oil companies have been forced to take dramatic action to shore up their finances in recent months, including cutting tens of billions of dollars from their budgets and laying off thousands of employees.
Exxon, which had previously disclosed a 30% cut to capital expenditures in 2020, said on Friday it has “identified significant potential for additional reductions” and said capital spending in 2021 will be lower than this year’s spending.
Its steepest cuts have been to U.S. shale drilling, particularly in the Permian Basin, the most active U.S. oil field, where it removed half of its drilling rigs and will cut half of the remaining 30 rigs by the end of year. Chevron is operating just four rigs in the Permian and said production there would decline around 7% this year.
Shell in April cut its dividend for the first time since World War II to avoid having to borrow to fund it. It reported a second-quarter loss of $18.4 billion on Thursday, which included a $16.8 billion write-down, while French giant Total posted an $8.4 billion loss including an $8.1 billion write-down. Both companies report net income attributable to shareholders, a proxy for net profits. BP reports Tuesday.
Excluding impairments, Shell and Total actually turned a profit during the quarter as their trading units helped stave off even larger losses.
Exxon and Chevron have promised they will maintain their dividends, viewed by many investors as the most attractive part of owning their stocks. Some analysts predict Exxon may be forced to cut its dividend in 2021 if market conditions don’t recover.
Exxon’s dividend payments cost the company almost $15 billion a year. The company’s debt grew by $8.8 billion in the quarter, according to Goldman Sach Group Inc., which said Exxon will need oil prices around $75 per barrel in 2021 to cover its dividend payments from cash flow. Exxon said Friday it wouldn’t take on additional debt.
Dan Pickering, chief investment officer of energy investment firm Pickering Energy Partners LP, said the industry can survive at $40 oil but needs significantly higher prices to thrive. According to Mr. Pickering, who said he holds small positions in Exxon and Chevron, oil companies will have to continue cost-cutting for the foreseeable future.
“You’ve got to assume that this is the world we’re going to be in, Mr. Pickering said. “And, if this is the world we’re going to be in, the cost structure is too high.”
Dave Sebastian contributed to this article.
Write to Christopher M. Matthews at christopher.matthews@wsj.com
Continue reading your article with
a WSJ membership
Already a member? Sign In
- Walmart:
Black Friday Deals for Days
- Hotels.com:
Hotels.com November 2022 Deals: Save 20% or more!
- Best Buy:
Save 15% or more on the Best Buy deal of the Day
- Expedia:
Today's Expedia promo code: Extra 10% off your stay
- SHEIN:
Extra 15% off - SHEIN coupon code
- Journeys:
Journeys: Save up to 45% on men’s and women's items"
frame of article is: industry
###
article: "Daily Business Briefing
Oil prices approached $100 a barrel on Tuesday, the highest in more than seven years, and European gas futures briefly jumped more than 13 percent, amid rising concerns over armed conflict in Ukraine after the Kremlin ordered Russian troops into separatist territories late Monday.
The price of Brent crude, the international benchmark, rose 4 percent, to about $99 a barrel. West Texas Intermediate was trading at about $95 a barrel, up about 5 percent.
European natural gas futures are especially sensitive to the latest news, because Russia provides more than a third of Europe's supply, with some of it running through pipelines in Ukraine. Dutch front-month gas futures jumped 13.8 percent when trading started on Tuesday, then eased a bit to about 78 euros a megawatt-hour, up more than 7 percent.
After oil prices spent a week more or less flat, uncertainty has gripped the markets in recent days. Prices went higher on Sunday as more troops massed at Ukraine’s border, then fell again as diplomatic solutions seemed more plausible.
An invasion could interrupt Russian natural gas and oil shipments to parts of Europe and then be followed by a decline in purchases of Russian energy by the West. Russia produces about 10 percent of world oil supplies and, in recent years, about one-third of Europe’s gas. In the event of significant hostilities, the United States and many other industrialized countries would likely consider releasing millions of barrels of oil from their strategic reserves.
There is also talk in Washington of suspending federal taxes on gasoline, which could help restrain prices at the pump, at least for a short time.
The average national price of a gallon of gasoline rose nearly 4 cents over the last week to $3.53, roughly 90 cents higher than a year ago. Gasoline prices at the pump usually follow global oil price trends by a week or two.
Global markets tumbled on Tuesday after Russia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin, ordered troops into two breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine late on Monday.
Oil prices jumped higher, while stock indexes around the world declined. The Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.6 percent, its fourth consecutive day of losses. Earlier, it had fallen nearly 2 percent. Futures pointed to a 1.1 percent decline in the S&P 500 when markets start trading later on Tuesday. (U.S. markets were closed on Monday for the Presidents’ Day holiday.)
In a speech on Monday, Mr. Putin said that Ukraine was a “country created by Russia,” and he signed a decree recognizing the independence of the breakaway regions, Donetsk and Luhansk, before sending in troops. European and American leaders have said that they will impose further sanctions in response.
The MOEX, Russia’s benchmark stock index, dropped more than 5 percent on Tuesday, following a 10.5 percent plunge the previous day, which was the worst single-day drop since March 2014, during the annexation of Crimea.
Government bond yields fell as traders sought the safety of Treasuries. The 10-year yield on U.S. Treasury notes declined two basis points, or 0.02 percentage points, to 1.90 percent. The potential global economic ramifications of the conflict in Ukraine have pulled down benchmark U.S. bond yields, which about a week ago were at their highest since mid-2019 as traders prepared for the Federal Reserve to begin raising interest rates to tackle inflation.
A war between Ukraine and Russia is likely to disrupt global supply chains of commodities, causing food and energy costs to rise and increasing the risk of a prolonged period of faster inflation. Russia is the world’s largest supplier of wheat and is a critical source of energy for Europe, providing nearly 40 percent of the continent’s natural gas and 25 percent of its oil. An extended conflict could worsen Europe’s already high energy bills.
Futures of Brent crude, the European benchmark, rose nearly 4 percent to about $99 a barrel.
Asian stock markets closed lower. The Hang Seng Index in Hong Kong fell 2.7 percent, its worst day since July, and the Nikkei 225 in Japan dropped 1.7 percent.
Monday
Presidents’ Day: Stock and bond markets in the United States will be closed.
Tuesday
Macy’s earnings: The beleaguered chain will report its financial results for the final three months of 2021 and for the full year. It raised its forecasts in November after reporting better-than-expected third-quarter results, but retail sales fell in December during the all-important holiday shopping season.
Home Depot earnings: The finances and outlook for Home Depot often can provide some insight into the housing market. Prices for housing materials have remained high, which has depressed home construction. But Home Depot said in November that it was seeing an uptick in sales to contractors as Americans felt more comfortable allowing outsiders into their homes again. Lowe’s will report on Wednesday.
Wednesday
Starbucks union vote: The National Labor Relations Board is expected to tally the results of a unionization vote at three Starbucks stores in the Buffalo area. Since employees at three other stores in the area began union campaigns last year, employees of at least 15 more stores around the country have filed petitions for union elections. Workers at a store in Mesa, Ariz., are also awaiting the results of an election.
Thursday
New home sales: Demand for new homes remains strong, but snarled supply chains are expected to continue to hinder availability. Housing starts fell in January, but housing permits rose, suggesting an upbeat sentiment among builders.
Discovery earnings: A deal to combine Discovery and WarnerMedia cleared a major regulatory hurdle this month, but the media company would inherit tensions arising from the resignation of the longtime president of CNN, Jeff Zucker, who stepped down at the behest of Jason Kilar, WarnerMedia’s chief executive.
Coinbase earnings: The firm’s market debut last year was greeted as a big step toward wider acceptance of digital currencies, but its shares have tumbled 50 percent from their first day of trading, rocked by a turbulent cryptocurrency market.
Friday
Inflation report: Economists expect the Personal Consumption Expenditures index, the measure of inflation preferred by the Federal Reserve, to show that prices rose 6 percent in January from a year earlier, up from 5.8 percent in December. That would continue the fastest pace of inflation since 1982. Policymakers at the central bank have been preparing to raise interest rates as they shift their focus to fighting persistently high inflation."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "New State Jobless Claims Surge as Employers Shed Jobs: Live Updates
American employers continue to shed workers at a staggering rate as a resurgent coronavirus and the absence of new federal aid take a toll on economic growth.
The Labor Department reported Thursday that 886,000 Americans filed new claims for unemployment benefits last week, an increase of nearly 77,000 from the previous week. Adjusted for seasonal variations, the total was 898,000.
After dropping in late spring and early summer as pandemic-related lockdowns eased, new claims for state jobless benefits had been steadily totaling about 800,000 a week.
“It’s discouraging,” said Ian Shepherdson, chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics. “We’re still stuck at a level of claims that’s far higher than it was during the worst of what followed the crash of 2008. The labor market appears to be stalled, which underscores the need for new stimulus as quickly as possible.”
New claims for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, an emergency federal program that covers freelancers, self-employed workers, part-timers and others who don’t qualify for benefits under the regular unemployment system, were tallied at 373,000, down from 474,000. Most of the decline reflected an aberration in Arizona, which has been dealing with fraud issues in the program and reported no new claims.
The data do not include fresh figures for California, which has temporarily stopped accepting new unemployment applications to address a huge processing backlog and weed out fraud. Instead, the report incorporated the last weekly figures available.
The lack of fresh data from California makes it difficult to draw firm conclusions, but the latest numbers “point to a lot of churn in the labor market, and it appears the rate of firings has picked up,” said Michael Gapen, chief U.S. economist at Barclays.
Over the past month, large employers including United Airlines, Disney and Allstate announced tens of thousands of layoffs, and more are expected as sectors like leisure and hospitality struggle. In some states, restaurants have salvaged some business by serving diners outside, but many will lose that option as temperatures fall.
Despite the widespread economic pain, Republicans and Democrats in Washington have been unable to agree on a new relief package, a failure that may cause the economy to slow further in the coming months. Federal benefits created in March to supplement state payments to the unemployed are set to expire by the end of the year.
Steven Mnuchin says he will back the Democrats’ testing proposal, but hurdles remain in reaching a deal.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said on Thursday that the White House was willing to make additional concessions to Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California in hopes of rekindling a stimulus deal before the election.
Speaking on CNBC, the Treasury secretary said that he would agree to the language that Democrats had insisted on when it came to a coronavirus testing program and noted that the two sides had already agreed to spend an additional $75 billion on testing and contact tracing. The specifics of such a program have been an obstacle in the talks.
“We’ll fundamentally agree with their testing language, subject to some minor issues,” Mr. Mnuchin said. “We need to get money to the American public now.”
The Treasury secretary is expected to speak to Ms. Pelosi later on Thursday.
Mr. Mnuchin’s remarks came after the Labor Department reported that the number of new claims for unemployment benefits jumped to 886,000 last week.
But significant hurdles remain in reaching a deal, including Republican resistance to what the White House is willing to support. On Wednesday, Mr. Mnuchin acknowledged it would be difficult to pass and enact a deal in the next three weeks.
In the interview on CNBC, Mr. Mnuchin did not directly address the lack of support for a bill by Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, suggesting that he has been briefed on negotiations between the White House and House Democrats while acknowledging that Senate Republicans prefer a more “targeted” relief bill.
Negotiators have been locked in fruitless talks for months. On Thursday, Mr. Mnuchin assailed Democrats for letting politics get in the way of reaching agreement before the election, though President Trump scuttled the talks himself when he said in a tweet last week that he had called off stimulus negotiations until after the election. The majority of Senate Republicans have also warned that they cannot accept the latest $1.8 trillion framework Mr. Mnuchin has put forward, even as Ms. Pelosi insists that plan is inadequate.
Mr. Mnuchin also called on Congress to give him the authority to repurpose approximately $300 billion in unused relief money from the legislation that was passed in March. He said he could begin getting that money into the economy this week.
Advertisement
More and more Americans are relying on a federal program designed to help the jobless as state unemployment benefits run out.
The program, Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Compensation, was created by Congress in March to provide 13 weeks of aid when regular state unemployment benefits expire — typically after 26 weeks.
It has now been more than 30 weeks since unemployment claims spiked in March, when the pandemic first forced the economy into lockdown mode, so millions of unemployed Americans are starting to qualify for the extended benefits.
But getting on the rolls isn’t easy, experts say. “The transition from regular state benefits to P.E.U.C. is not going smoothly,” said Heidi Shierholz, senior economist and director of policy at the Economic Policy Institute, a left-leaning research group.
In some places, recipients of state unemployment benefits haven’t been notified of their eligibility for the federal extension, and aging computer systems have slowed the processing of applications.
Still, in the week that ended Sept. 26, the most recent period with available data, nearly 2.8 million people were getting Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Compensation benefits, a jump from fewer than two million the previous week. That increase was roughly equal to the decline in the number collecting state benefits.
The federal program is set to expire at the end of the year, and if it is not extended by Congress, “we’re going to see a disaster,” Ms. Shierholz said. “There will be a huge drop in living standards and an increase in poverty as well as downward pressure on economic growth.”
For those who qualify, the program has helped as they search for work.
Jared Gaxiola of Torrance, Calif., was laid off from his job as a freelance lighting technician in March, after live events were canceled across the country.
When Mr. Gaxiola’s state benefits ran out in mid-September, he was able to get a 13-week extension through Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Compensation.
Mr. Gaxiola, 35, hopes to find a job by the time the payments run out again in December. But with entertainment work still scarce, he worries about how he will pay his rent in the new year.
“I could probably borrow money from my sister if I needed to,” Mr. Gaxiola said. “But I really don’t want to have to do that.”
— Nelson D. Schwartz and
Before the pandemic struck, Chloe Ezi was a lifeguard at a public aquatic center in Powder Springs, Ga. It was part-time work, at $11 an hour, but she was able to bring in an extra $300 a week by teaching private swim lessons.
In March, Ms. Ezi was sent home for three months when the aquatic center closed during coronavirus lockdowns. Because she continued to be paid half her wages — about $75 a week — the pool told her that she was not eligible to file for unemployment benefits.
Ms. Ezi, 19, was called back to work in May, but because virus restrictions kept her from teaching private swim lessons, she was able to bring in only about $150 a week — barely enough to cover her $280 monthly car insurance bill, her $80 cellphone bill, and $100 monthly payments to Penn Foster College, where she is completing a dental assistant certificate program, plus groceries and other necessities.
“That’s not a lot to live off of,” Ms. Ezi said. “I was zeroing out my paycheck every month.”
To save money, Ms. Ezi lived with her boyfriend in his parents’ house.
“We’re all just a big family living in this house together,” she said. “It can get pretty stressful living with so many people like this.”
Tired of living in such close quarters, Ms. Ezi began looking for a job that would pay more. In August, she found a full-time position as a sales representative at a store that sells birding equipment, where she makes $13 an hour plus tips. She remains on the staff at the pool, where she still picks up an occasional shift.
Now she and her boyfriend can afford to rent a one-bedroom apartment in Smyrna, Ga. They moved in on Wednesday.
“My new job allowed us to finally get our own place,” she said. “I’m feeling pretty proud of myself right now.”
For three years, Lea Polizzi worked more than 50 hours a week as a nanny and a freelance photographer in New York City. But in March, when the pandemic hit, the family she worked for on the Upper East Side left the city, and all of her photography gigs dried up.
Ms. Polizzi, 24, filed for unemployment benefits and started receiving about $200 a week from the state, as well as a $600 federal supplement. Those payments enabled her to meet expenses — including the $1,100 rent for her apartment in the Bushwick neighborhood of Brooklyn — while she looked for a job.
But the $600 payments expired at the end of July. Since then, Ms. Polizzi has used about 75 percent of her savings — roughly $4,000 — to pay bills.
“That was the money I had saved to use for vacations or emergency funds,” Ms. Polizzi said. “I was going to buy a new camera. And then as soon as everything started going down, I had to put everything on hold, because I knew that I was going to end up having to pay rent with it eventually.”
Ms. Polizzi recently received $900 from Lost Wages Assistance, a short-term supplement from the federal government, and she expects one more payment from the program in the next few weeks.
In the meantime, she has taken matters into her own hands. She is making masks, lingerie, hats and jewelry and selling the items online at $25 to $200 apiece.
She has made about 60 sales. “Hopefully, I’ll be able to make it work and just pay all my bills through my art ventures,” she said.
Advertisement
Stocks fell on Thursday, as earnings reports and new economic data reminded investors of the challenges that companies and workers face amid a second wave of coronavirus cases. New restrictions were imposed in London after a curfew in Paris and other French cities.
Share prices for airlines and hospitality companies, already battered this year, fell as the tightening European rules cast a shadow over travel and spending in the coming holiday season.
On Wall Street, the S&P 500 dropped more than 1 percent at the start of trading, on track for its third consecutive daily decline, before recovering some ground. The drop in European markets was steeper, with the Stoxx 600 Europe and Britain’s FTSE 100 down more than 2 percent.
It didn’t seem to help that Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said on Thursday that the White House was willing to make additional concessions to Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California in hopes of rekindling a stimulus deal before the election. Mr. Mnuchin had dampened sentiment in the markets Wednesday by cautioning that he didn’t expect a relief package before the Nov. 3 election.
Mr. Mnuchin’s comments came as data from the Labor Department showed that new state unemployment claims jumped last week to nearly 900,000, a figure that highlights the fact that employers continue to shed workers at a staggering rate.
The slide in markets on Thursday is “linked to spikes in coronavirus cases and fears that regional lockdowns will subdue the economic recovery,” said Susannah Streeter, an analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown. “We are seeing fresh losses for airlines and travel stocks.”
Shares of European airlines, Lufthansa and easyJet, fell sharply. Ryanair tumbled after saying it would fly only 40 percent of its usual capacity this winter, down from previous plans for 60 percent.
On Wall Street, United Airlines dropped after the company said it lost $1.8 billion in the three months through September. Marriott International, MGM Resorts and other travel and tourism stocks were also lower.
— Eshe Nelson and
On the afternoon of Feb. 24, President Trump declared on Twitter that the coronavirus was “very much under control” in the United States, but hours earlier, senior members of the president’s economic team, privately addressing board members of the conservative Hoover Institution, were less confident.
Tomas J. Philipson, a senior economic adviser to the president, told the group he could not yet estimate the effects of the virus on the American economy. To some in the group, the implication was that an outbreak could prove worse than Mr. Philipson and other Trump administration advisers were signaling in public at the time.
The next day, board members — many of them Republican donors — got another taste of government uncertainty from Larry Kudlow, the director of the National Economic Council. Hours after he had boasted on CNBC that the virus was contained in the United States and “it’s pretty close to airtight,” Mr. Kudlow delivered a more ambiguous private message. He asserted that the virus was “contained in the U.S., to date, but now we just don’t know,” according to a document describing the sessions obtained by The New York Times.
The document, written by a hedge fund consultant who attended the three-day gathering of Hoover’s board, was stark. “What struck me,” the consultant wrote, was that nearly every official he heard from raised the virus “as a point of concern, totally unprovoked.”
The consultant’s assessment quickly spread through parts of the investment world. U.S. stocks were already spiraling because of a warning from a federal public health official that the virus was likely to spread, but traders spotted the immediate significance: The president’s aides appeared to be giving wealthy party donors an early warning of a potentially impactful contagion at a time when Mr. Trump was publicly insisting that the threat was nonexistent.
Interviews with eight people who either received copies of the memo or were briefed on aspects of it as it spread among investors in New York and elsewhere provide a glimpse of how elite traders had access to information from the administration that helped them gain financial advantage during a chaotic three days when global markets were teetering.
To many of the investors who received or heard about the memo, it was the first significant sign of skepticism among Trump administration officials about their ability to contain the virus. It also provided a hint of the fallout that was to come, said one major investor who was briefed on it: the upending of daily life for the entire country.
“Short everything,” was the reaction of the investor, using the Wall Street term for betting on the idea that the stock prices of companies would soon fall.
— Kate Kelly and
Americans used one-time stimulus checks they received from the federal government early in the pandemic to pad their savings accounts and pay off debt, new research from the Federal Reserve shows.
Households spent just 29 percent of the money they received earlier this year, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York said in a post on its website, citing its Survey of Consumer Expectations, conducted in June and August. Another 36 percent of the cash was saved, while 35 percent was used to pay down debt.
Americans adults who qualified for the stimulus received up to $1,200 each, with an extra $500 added per child in the household. Out of the Fed’s sample, 89 percent of households received money.
Poorer families and those who lost jobs or income amid the pandemic were more likely to use their money to pay down debts, while richer families saved the money.
“The economic impact payments, by increasing both household income and the debt pay down, contributed importantly to the sharp increase in the overall saving rate during the early months of the pandemic,” the central bank’s researchers wrote in the post.
Several factors might have been behind the relatively low spending and high saving. People were unsure when the economic crisis would clear up, the researchers wrote, and might have been acting cautiously. They were on lockdown, which might have limited opportunities to spend, and some rent payments — which count as consumption — were delayed.
The trends seem unlikely to change if new aid becomes available: In the August survey, the New York Fed asked what households might do if they received another $1,500 check. Respondents expect to spend even less of that money, about 24 percent.
The newfound savings buffer cushioned the blow as expanded unemployment insurance expired. Consumer spending has held up even though millions remain unemployed but are no longer receiving an extra $600 per week from the federal government.
“We’re still benefiting from the stimulus,” Randal K. Quarles, vice chair for supervision at the Fed, said during an event on Wednesday, noting that it makes it harder to guess what will happen to the economy once that tailwind fades.
Advertisement
Morgan Stanley was the latest Wall Street bank to report a jump in earnings for the three months through September, helped in large part by an upswing in trading revenue.
Profit rose 25 percent to $2.72 billion over the same period last year, the bank said on Thursday. Revenue rose 16 percent to $11.66 billion.
As U.S. markets rallied during the quarter, revenue from the bank’s trading business rose 19 percent from the same period last year. Gains from loans held for sale as part of Morgan Stanley’s corporate lending activity also rose substantially.
Still, in what could be interpreted as a sign of optimism over the health of the corporate economy, Morgan Stanley’s provision for credit losses on loans and lending commitments was less than half of what it was in the previous quarter.
Morgan Stanley’s chief executive, James P. Gorman, said in a statement that the quarter was characterized by “consistent, high returns.” He predicted that the completion of his bank’s acquisition of the trading company E*TRADE and its recently announced purchase of Eaton Vance would position Morgan Stanley well for future growth.
Poverty has returned to levels higher than before the coronavirus crisis, two new studies have found. The number of poor people has grown by eight million since May, according to researchers at Columbia University, after falling by four million at the beginning of the pandemic as a result of the $2 trillion emergency package known as the Cares Act. Using a different definition of poverty, researchers from the University of Chicago and Notre Dame found that poverty has grown by six million people in the past three months, with circumstances worsening most for Black people and children.
Shares in Big Hit, the management company behind the Korean boy band BTS, skyrocketed on their first day of trading in South Korea on Thursday, as investors rushed to get a piece of one of the world’s biggest musical acts. The stock opened at 270,000 won, or about $235, double the company’s offering price of 135,000 won, and was up 30 percent, the daily limit, in early trading. By day’s end, the stock was down over 4 percent from its opening price, with the company’s value settling at around 8.7 trillion won, or about $7.6 billion, by the market’s close.
Wells Fargo has found evidence that some employees filed fraudulent applications to get money from a Small Business Administration relief program supporting companies dealing with coronavirus lockdowns, according to an internal memo. The memo said the employees had created fake profiles to file for money from the Economic Injury Disaster Loan program. “We have terminated the employment of those individuals and will cooperate fully with law enforcement,” the bank’s head of human resources, David Galloreese, wrote in the memo, which was posted on an internal website on Wednesday.
United Airlines lost $1.8 billion in the three months through September, with operating revenue down 78 percent compared with the same period in 2019. The airline said it ended September with more than $19 billion in cash and other available liquidity, boosted by a large debt offering backed by its mileage program and the ability to borrow $5.2 billion from the Treasury Department."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "American unemployment benefits claims remain at a 17-year record low, according to new data released on Thursday from by the U.S. Department of Labor.
American workers filed 245,000 claims for state unemployment benefits during the week that ended on December 23, according to seasonally adjusted jobless statistics published on Thursday.
Since mid-October, unemployment claims have ranged 223,000 to 252,000 workers.
The American economy reached its 147th straight week that unemployment claims dipped below 300,000, which marks the longest unemployment streak since 1970.
The unemployment rate has reached a 17-year low at 4.1 percent as the economy added 228,000 jobs in November, more than double the roughly 100,000 jobs per month needed to keep up with the growth in the working-age population.
The growing economy encouraged the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates this month for the third time year. The country’s central bank signaled that it plans to raise rates three times next year.
American consumer sentiment reached its highest level since 2000, according to the University of Michigan.
Retail sales also boomed 4.9 percent over the previous holiday shopping season.
Several other American corporations announced that they will also invest in their employees, give their workers bonuses and wage hikes, and invest in America.
Comcast announced after the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act passed in December that they will distribute $1,000 bonuses to more than one hundred thousand frontline and non-executive employees and invest more than $50 billion in infrastructure over the next several years as a result of Republicans passing tax reform.
Fellow bank Wells Fargo also revealed that they will raise their staff minimum wage to $15 an hour and would also target $400 million in donations to community and non-profit organizations next year thanks to the Republican tax bill.
AT&T announced that they will distribute more $1,000 bonuses to more than 200,000 of their employees and invest more than $1 billion next year in their domestic business.
President Donald Trump tweeted on Thursday, “Retail sales are at record numbers. We’ve got the economy going better than anyone ever dreamt – and you haven’t seen anything yet!”
Retail sales are at record numbers. We’ve got the economy going better than anyone ever dreamt – and you haven’t seen anything yet!
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) December 28, 2017
Comment count on this article reflects comments made on Breitbart.com and Facebook. Visit Breitbart's Facebook Page."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Unemployment Claims to Remain Historically High
Weekly report will likely show pandemic continues to batter labor market
The number of Americans applying for unemployment benefits likely held above pre-pandemic highs last week, a sign the labor market is still being battered by the novel coronavirus’s effects.
Economists expect applications for jobless benefits—seen as a proxy for layoffs—ticked down to 825,000 last week from 837,000 a week earlier. Weekly jobless claims are down sharply from a peak of nearly seven million in March but have clocked in at between 800,000 and 900,000 for more than a month. Claims remain above the pre-pandemic high of 695,000.
“It’s more of the same, but it’s also still jaw-dropping that we have that many new claims even now, as we’re six, seven months into this whole recession and recovery,” said Eliza Forsythe, an economics professor at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
The number of people collecting unemployment benefits through regular state programs, which cover most workers, fell to 11.8 million in the week ended Sept. 19 from 12.7 million the prior week, according to the Labor Department. A decline in so-called continuing claims indicates many unemployed people are returning to work.
But some of the drop in continuing claims represents individuals who have exhausted the maximum duration of payments available through regular state programs and are now collecting money through a federal program that provides an extra 13 weeks of benefits. About 1.8 million people were receiving aid through this extended-benefits program in the week ended Sept. 12, up from 1.6 million a week earlier, Labor Department data show.
Large corporations announced job cuts last week, including American Airlines Group Inc., United Airlines Holdings Inc., and Walt Disney Co. Many of those workers will likely seek unemployment benefits in the coming weeks.
The labor market and economy more broadly are flashing signs of a slowdown. Monthly job gains and job postings have cooled, and more layoffs are becoming permanent. Household income fell at the end of summer because of a drop in federal supplements to jobless benefits, and consumer spending is also growing more slowly.
Leland Lambert, age 38, of Salt Lake City, was laid off in June from his job as an operations director at a day-care center when the nonprofit exhausted federal aid through the Paycheck Protection Program, which was designed to keep workers on payrolls.
As soon as he was laid off, the Utah resident slashed spending on nonessentials like soda and Netflix and applied for jobless benefits. Mr. Lambert is collecting regular state unemployment benefits of about $550 a week while searching for a new job. But his outlook for finding work is bleak after having applied for more than 100 jobs since June in roles such as operations management and business consulting.
“There are a ton of unemployed, and the jobs just aren’t quite there yet,” Mr. Lambert said. “Especially in the upper-management side, the competition is pretty tough.”
He decided to pursue an online master’s degree program in management and leadership while continuing to seek employment. He expects it will be several more months before a job comes his way.
Millions of workers are receiving jobless benefits through a federal pandemic program for the self-employed, gig workers and others not typically eligible for unemployment aid. In the week ended Sept. 12, 11.8 million individuals were seeking benefits through this program.
Many economists are skeptical about the accuracy of the pandemic claims figures, though. The pandemic unemployment program has been subject to fraud, as it is more difficult for state labor departments to verify incomes of self-employed people and gig workers than regular employees, Ms. Forsythe noted.
Congress also passed legislation this spring authorizing federal funding for an additional $600 in unemployment benefits. After those benefits expired, President Trump signed an executive order in August to replace them with an additional $300. States were authorized to tap $44 billion in disaster-relief funds to pay up to six weeks of benefits from the week ended Aug. 1.
On Tuesday, President Trump halted negotiations with Democrats on a larger coronavirus relief package until after the election, reducing the likelihood of further federal unemployment aid in the near term.
Write to Sarah Chaney at sarah.chaney@wsj.com
Copyright ©2020 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "The tendrils of the coronavirus pandemic reached deeper into the American economy last week, leaving millions more people out of work as the damage spread to jobs and industries that were spared at the outset of the crisis.
More than 6.6 million people filed new claims for unemployment benefits last week, the Labor Department said Thursday, setting a grim record for the second straight week.
The latest claims brought the two-week total to nearly 10 million.
The speed and scale of the job losses is without precedent. Until last month, the worst week for unemployment filings was 695,000 in 1982. By shuttering businesses and forcing vast layoffs, the coronavirus outbreak has in two weeks wiped out more jobs than the worst months of the last recession.
“What usually takes months or quarters to happen in a recession is happening in a matter of weeks,” said Michelle Meyer, chief U.S. economist for Bank of America Merrill Lynch.
7
million
6,648,000
Claims were filed last week
6
Initial jobless claims, per week
Seasonally adjusted
5
4
The week before was revised
up 24,000 to 3,307,000
3
RECESSION
2
1
0
’04
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
7
million
6,648,000
Claims were filed last week
6
Initial jobless claims, per week
5
Seasonally adjusted
4
The week before was revised
up 24,000 to 3,307,000
3
RECESSION
2
1
0
’04
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
7
million
6,648,000
Claims were filed last week
6
Initial jobless claims, per week
5
Seasonally adjusted
4
The week before was revised
up 24,000 to 3,307,000
3
RECESSION
2
1
0
’04
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
7
million
6,648,000
Claims were filed last week
6
5
Initial jobless claims, per week
4
Seasonally adjusted
The week before was revised
up 24,000 to 3,307,000
3
RECESSION
2
1
0
’04
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
The economic damage from the pandemic was initially concentrated in tourism, hospitality and related industries. But now the pain is spreading much more widely. The Institute for Supply Management said Wednesday that the manufacturing sector, which had recently begun to recover from last year’s trade war, was contracting again. Data from the employment site ZipRecruiter shows a steep drop in job postings even in industries usually insulated from recessions, like education and health care.
Law firms, technology start-ups and other white-collar employers that were initially able to keep workers on payroll and let them work from home are now laying people off as revenue dries up.
Even ZipRecruiter isn’t immune — the company cut hundreds of jobs this week as the steep drop in job postings cut into its business.
“People are being way too sanguine about a lot of the white-collar industries,” said Martha Gimbel, an economist and labor market expert at Schmidt Futures, a philanthropic initiative. “This thing is going to come for us all.”
Erica Battle, an education consultant in Nashville, figured her industry was as close to recession-proof as any — no matter how bad the economy, schools stay open. But as schools moved to online learning because of the virus, business began to dry up. Then, on March 16, as she was preparing for a weeklong consulting trip to Alabama and Texas, she got a call: The gigs were canceled.
“It was like, this is unbelievable, this is not really happening,” Ms. Battle said. “I’m going to wake up and I’m going to have to catch a flight.”
April was meant to be one of her busiest months, as schools rush to get students ready for standardized testing season. Instead, she is home with her husband and teenage son, trying to figure out how to cut expenses. They have gotten their bank to defer this month’s mortgage payment. Ms. Battle’s husband, a substance abuse counselor, still has a job, but they aren’t sure how long that will last.
“When you have to think about paying for groceries or for therapy, which one are you going to do?” Ms. Battle said.
Economists have warned that those sorts of choices — groceries or therapy? — could turn an acute economic crisis into a long recession. If laid-off workers can’t pay their bills, there could be a cascade of further layoffs and business failures. The greater the damage, the less chance of a quick economic rebound once the health crisis eases.
“The deeper the layoffs get, the longer the recovery will take,” said Julia Pollak, a labor economist for ZipRecruiter.
The $2 trillion emergency outlay by Congress last week was meant, in part, to prevent that cascade. The government will provide businesses with low-interest loans — which in some cases could turn into grants — to help them avoid layoffs and keep the lights on. And the law temporarily expanded the unemployment insurance system to cover more workers and offer them more generous benefits.
But even before that expansion, the unemployment system was strained by the surge in job losses. State unemployment offices have reported record levels of calls and online inquiries, and jobless workers have struggled to get through to file claims.
Dustin Sullivan, 39, finished his final shift at the check-in desk at the W Hotel in Times Square on March 19, but he had to wait to apply for jobless benefits until Wednesday of the following week — the day that New York had designated for people whose last names begin with the letters O through Z.
He spent most of the next week struggling to file a claim, first encountering a website crash and then a telephone nightmare: “Calling on the phone and getting a busy signal. Calling and getting an automated message saying no one’s available and hanging up on me. Calling and immediately getting a message in Spanish that I don’t understand. Calling and getting through-ish — to the first part of the session” — the part that takes your information and Social Security number before telling you to hold on to speak to a representative — “and then hangs up on you.”
Finally, on Tuesday, he managed to file his claim.
“So I now join the group who can shout out to the rest: ‘There’s hope!’” Mr. Sullivan wrote in an email.
Mr. Sullivan was one of more than 366,000 New Yorkers to file claims last week, up from 80,000 the week before, according to Thursday’s federal data. California, another state that has struggled with the deluge of filings, reported close to 900,000 claims last week, up from 186,000. Those figures, unlike the nationwide total, are not adjusted for seasonal patterns.
In a news conference this week, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said he knew the state’s claims system wasn’t keeping up with the surge, and he said hundreds of people were working to expand capacity.
“The site is so deluged that it keeps crashing because you literally have hundreds of thousands of people at any time trying to get on the site,” he said. “I apologize for the pain. It must be infuriating.”
Economists, too, have struggled to keep pace with the speed of the collapse. A month ago, most forecasters still thought the United States could avoid a recession. Today, many economists are expecting a decline in gross domestic product that rivals the worst periods of the Great Depression.
On Friday, the Labor Department will release its monthly report on hiring and unemployment, usually one of the most-watched indicators on the economic calendar. But the data was collected in early March, an eon ago in the coronavirus age. Most forecasters expect it to show only a modest uptick in the unemployment rate and a small decline in jobs, despite the wave of layoffs that hit later in the month.
For workers and businesses, the reversal of fortune has been head-spinning.
Barely a month ago, Elizabeth Mora quit her job in Utah to take a new position as a supply chain manager for MGM Resorts in Las Vegas. But by the time she crossed the state line in a moving truck two weeks later, the hospitality industry was beginning to shut down. After two days on the job she was furloughed, and the MGM hotel where she was staying temporarily as part of her relocation package had closed.
“In a moment, I became both jobless and homeless,” she said.
Now Ms. Mora is staying with an acquaintance and living out of the suitcase she filled with two weeks’ worth of clothes when she moved. The rest of her belongings are in a storage facility. She is applying for any job she can find and briefly considered selling home-baked bread — until she discovered that the local grocery stores had no more flour.
When she accepted the job at MGM, Ms. Mora said, she was excited to begin a new phase. Now, she said, she is just trying to survive.
“I picked up my entire life and I moved here, not only physically but emotionally,” she said. “I’ve never felt the sense of uncertainty like I do now.”"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "WASHINGTON—Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell indicated the central bank is on track to raise interest rates by a half percentage point at its next meeting, stepping down from an unprecedented series of four 0.75-point rate rises aimed at combating high inflation.
Mr. Powell, in a speech Wednesday, said an overheated labor market needed to cool more for the Fed to be confident that inflation would make durable downward progress toward its 2% goal.
Because the Fed has raised rates rapidly and it takes time for those moves to influence the economy, it would make sense for officials to slow rate increases, he said at an event at the Brookings Institution. “The time for moderating the pace of rate increases may come as soon as the December meeting,” he said.
Mr. Powell reviewed signs of progress on the inflation fight, including a slowdown in interest-rate sensitive sectors of the economy such as housing and improving supply-chain conditions. But he said that declines in goods prices and rents, which have contributed notably to inflation over the last 18 months, might be insufficient if firms don’t slow their hiring.
“The labor market … shows only tentative signs of rebalancing, and wage growth remains well above levels that would be consistent with 2% inflation,” Mr. Powell said. “Despite some promising developments, we have a long way to go in restoring price stability.”
Inflation is running near a 40-year high and has triggered the most rapid series of interest-rate increases by the Fed since the early 1980s. The Fed seeks to reduce inflation by slowing the economy through tighter financial conditions—such as higher borrowing costs, lower stock prices and a stronger dollar—which typically curb demand.
SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS
Is the Fed taking the right steps to combat inflation? Join the conversation below.
Fed officials lifted their benchmark rate by 0.75 percentage point on Nov. 2 to a range between 3.75% and 4%. Many officials have signaled they are leaning toward approving a 0.5-point increase at their Dec. 13-14 meeting. They had held the rate near zero until March.
A big question now for the Fed is how much farther to keep raising rates. Some officials are concerned about causing unnecessary damage to the economy and labor market because it takes time for the full effects of those increases to ripple through the economy.
Other policy makers are concerned that price pressures could stay high because, despite improvements in supply chains and commodity markets, prices have picked up for more labor-intensive services.
Mr. Powell repeated his earlier view that officials were likely to raise rates to a somewhat higher level early next year than they had anticipated in projections released after their September meeting, when most officials saw their benchmark rate rising to between 4.5% and 5%.
“There is no doubt that we have made substantial progress,” he said. “We have more ground to cover.”
Mr. Powell’s comments signaled less confidence in forecasts that have repeatedly suggested an imminent and rapid deceleration in price pressures because inflation has mostly “moved stubbornly sideways” over the course of this year.
Newsletter Sign-up
Real Time Economics
The latest economic news, analysis and data curated weekdays by WSJ's Jeffrey Sparshott.
He focused part of his remarks on exploring why the share of Americans seeking work remains below its prepandemic level. The analysis carries important implications for the setting of interest rates because if wage pressures remain stronger in the coming years, that could lead to a period of greater volatility in wages, inflation and interest rates.
Mr. Powell said most of the shortfall appears to reflect older Americans who retired early when the pandemic hit the U.S. in March 2020—and from slower growth in the working-age population, which he said could reflect reduced levels of legal immigration and a surge in deaths during the pandemic.
Steps to boost workforce participation aren’t controlled by the Fed and wouldn’t be able to take effect rapidly enough to address the current bout of inflation, Mr. Powell said.
The upshot is that Fed policy will seek to slow inflation and wage growth by reducing demand for workers, a subject that Mr. Powell addressed delicately on Wednesday. “For the near term, a moderation of labor demand growth will be required to restore balance to the labor market,” he said.
While strong wage growth “is a good thing,” he implied it is too high right now to support a return to the 2% inflation rate the Fed targets. “For wage growth to be sustainable, it needs to be consistent with 2% inflation,” he said.
Separately, Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said on Wednesday that inflation could come down without broad layoffs occurring across the economy if companies slow hiring by reducing the number of unfilled jobs they’re trying to fill.
The U.S. unemployment rate stood at 3.7% in October. A rate between 4% and 5% would still indicate a robust labor market, she said at a New York Times event. “I think we can make a lot of progress in the labor market just on the hiring...and job opening side. I don’t think it’s necessary to see very substantial layoffs,” she added.
Write to Nick Timiraos at nick.timiraos@wsj.com
Inflation and the Economy
Analysis from The Wall Street Journal, selected by the editors
Continue reading your article with
a WSJ membership
Already a member? Sign In
- The Motley Fool:
New members save 55% on Stock Advisor
- Wayfair:
Up to 15% off + free shipping at Wayfair
- American Eagle Outfitters:
Sign up for emails and get 10% off American Eagle promo code
- Kohl's:
Kohl's coupon - 30% off sitewide for Rewards members
- Walmart:
Walmart coupon: $20 off your $50+ order
- Chase:
Get up to $625 unlimited commission-free online trades"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "What is at stake as Congress considers the E.P.A. budget? Far more than climate change.
The Trump administration’s proposed cuts to the Environmental Protection Agency budget are deep and wide-ranging. It seeks to shrink spending by 31 percent, to $5.7 billion from $8.1 billion, and to eliminate a quarter of the agency’s 15,000 jobs.
The cuts are so deep that even Republican lawmakers are expected to push back. Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, the chairwoman of the Interior and Environment Subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee, pointedly reminded Mr. Trump last month that his budget request was just “the first step in a long process.”
Here are some proposed cuts that are likely to face resistance when the budget reaches Congress.
Tap water
Flint, Mich., is still reeling from its tainted water crisis, and unsafe levels of lead have turned up in tap water in city after city. Still, the E.P.A. is looking to decrease grants that help states monitor public water systems by almost a third, to $71 million from $102 million, according to an internal agency memo first obtained by The Washington Post.
The Public Water System Supervision Grant Program has been critical in making sure communities have access to safe drinking water. In Texas, for example, state-contracted workers collect drinking water samples across the state, an effort funded in part by federal grants.Continue reading the main story
Much of the risk to the country’s water supply stems from its crumbling public water infrastructure: a network of pipes, treatment plants and other facilities built decades ago. Although Congress banned lead pipes in 1986, between 3.3 million and 10 million older ones remain, primed to leach lead into tap water.
Criminal and civil enforcement
Sharp cuts in the agency’s enforcement programs could curtail its ability to police environmental offenders and impose penalties. The budget proposal reduces spending on civil and criminal enforcement by almost 60 percent, to $4 million from a combined $10 million. It also eliminates 200 jobs.
Just last week, the agency fined Sunoco Pipeline, a subsidiary of the operator behind the Dakota Access pipeline, nearly $1 million over a 2012 spill. The spill sent 1,950 barrels of gasoline into two waterways near Wellington, Ohio, forcing the evacuation of 70 people.
One enforcement activity that could be set for an increase: security for Scott Pruitt, the new E.P.A. administrator. The agency has asked for 10 additional full-time staff members for a round-the-clock security detail — a first for an E.P.A. chief, who usually has only door-to-door protection — and more than doubling the agency’s infrastructure and operations staff.
Geographic programs
The agency is taking an equal-opportunity approach to regional cleanup programs, proposing to virtually eliminate all of them: Chesapeake Bay, Gulf of Mexico, Lake Champlain, Long Island Sound, Puget Sound, San Francisco Bay, South Florida, the Great Lakes.
Together, those projects amount to a loss of more than $400 million in federal funding for the regions involved. The largest part of that goes to the Great Lakes restoration effort, which is helping revive wetland habitats, clean up toxic pollution, combat invasive species and prevent runoff from farms and cities.
The E.P.A.’s defunding of these projects could backfire. Much of the federal money has gone toward helping bring affected communities to the table to find solutions. Absent that route, communities could sue the E.P.A. for failing to act, ultimately running up the agency’s legal bills and slowing remediation as cases wind their way through the courts.
Superfunds and brownfields
Superfund is as high-stakes as environmental programs get. It makes federal funds available for the cleanup of sites contaminated by hazardous substances and pollutants, like the now-defunct Wolff-Alport Chemical Company in Queens, in New York City, which was designated a Superfund site in 2014. The site is heavily contaminated with thorium, a radioactive metal with a half-life of 14 billion years that has been linked to a higher incidence of lung, pancreatic and bone cancer. Superfund money is helping clean up the thorium.
The Superfund program can actually save taxpayers money, because it lets the E.P.A. identify polluters and compel them to pay for the cleanup. But the proposed budget reduces its enforcement and remedial components by 45 percent, bringing it to $221 million from $404 million.
E.P.A. officials call Brownfields, a program that helps towns and cities redevelop former industrial sites, one of the agency’s most popular programs. The E.P.A. website still lists its success stories: refashioning an old textile mill in Hickory, N.C., into a retail, dining and event space, and redeveloping former factory sites on the banks of Iowa’s Cedar River into riverfront condominiums. Funding to states under the Brownfields program is set for a reduction of 30 percent, to $33 million from $48 million.
Endocrine disrupters
The exact science behind, and health consequences of, a class of chemicals called endocrine disrupters remains unsettled. With the proposed cuts to research at the E.P.A., it could stay that way.
The budget eliminates a $6 million research and screening effort targeting the chemicals, which are found widely in pesticides, plastics, shampoos and cosmetics, cash register receipts, food can linings and other products. The chemicals have been linked to breast cancer in women and hypospadias, a birth defect in boys.
Ending the program, which would result in the loss of nine jobs, would curtail the agency’s ability to review medical data and work with environmental lawyers to fashion an agency response.
Climate protection
It is no surprise that the new E.P.A. is targeting climate change initiatives, given the Trump administration’s hostility toward the science of global warming and a pro-business bent. But many of the programs that fall under the $70 million Climate Protection Program — which would be eliminated under the White House proposal — are industry favorites.
Take the Energy Star program for energy-efficient televisions, washers, dryers, lights and other consumer goods. Companies say Energy Star helps give their products a competitive edge, and also helps them sell overseas, where the standard has been adopted by the European Union, Japan, Australia and Canada, among major markets.
And the SmartWay program works with logistics companies to make their operations more climate friendly. SmartWay helps trucking companies fit their trucks with aerodynamic flaps and low-resistance tires, for example, that save fuel and reduce emissions.
Federal vehicle and fuels standards
It has been barely a year since Volkswagen agreed to pay as much as $14.7 billion to settle claims stemming from its diesel emissions cheating scandal, and the E.P.A. has accused a second automaker, Fiat Chrysler, of evading emissions standards. But the proposed budget cuts would all but eliminate the $48.7 million federal budget for vehicle tests and certification.
The budget foresees getting automakers themselves to pay for testing through fees. But that takes time to set up, and any funding shortfall in the meantime would mean a significant paring back of the work at E.P.A.’s emissions testing labs.
Nonpoint source grants
The Trump administration has declared its intent to roll back business-killing regulations. But the second-biggest item eliminated from the proposed budget, after the Great Lakes Restoration project, exists precisely because federal regulations do not cover all pollutants.
The $165 million Nonpoint Source Grant program helps states deal with pollutants from sources that are not directly regulated under the Clean Water Act — like the phosphorus that flows into Lake Erie from fertilizer, which feeds algae and weeds that starve the water of oxygen, harming fish and other wildlife.
Among other remedies, the nonpoint source grants have been used to help states create “buffer strips” — areas of thick vegetation that help filter the contaminated runoff. The proposed budget would eliminate the grants.
Radiation protection and response preparedness
When the 2011 Fukushima nuclear crisis in Japan sent radioactive plumes across the Pacific, the E.P.A.’s RadNet system monitored the fallout on America’s shores, deploying additional air monitors in Alaska and Hawaii and ordering accelerated samplings of rain, tap water and milk.
Over the next two months, laboratory analyses detected very low amounts of iodine and other radionuclides across the country. Levels remained far below the safety threshold, and the E.P.A. determined that no action was needed. But in the case of another nuclear accident, RadNet could help officials make science-based decisions on how to protect the public.
The proposed budget would defund the agency’s $3.3 million Radiation Protection program and eliminate 60 jobs. It would also remove four jobs from the Radiation Response Preparedness program; despite those job cuts, funding for that modest program would increase by $177,000, to just over $500,0000, to be used for “essential preparedness work only.”Continue reading the main story"
frame of article is: government
###
article: "Here’s what you need to know:
- The U.S. deficit surged to a record monthly high in April.
- The Fed releases new details about a coming lending program.
- As restrictions start to lift, anxious workers are pushing to maintain safeguards.
- Uber is said to be in talks to acquire Grubhub.
- Trump says California should let Elon Musk restart Tesla factory.
The U.S. deficit surged to a record monthly high in April.
The United States recorded its largest monthly deficit in history in April as the government began funneling billions of dollars of stimulus funds to cushion the economy from the coronavirus pandemic.
The Treasury Department said on Tuesday that the budget deficit surged to $738 billion last month as the Trump administration deferred tax payments that normally come due in April to mid-July and sent millions of Americans economic relief payments. It was the largest shortfall of any month on record and the deficit for the fiscal year to date topped $1.4 trillion.
The figures show the breadth of the fiscal measures that the government has been taking to support a cratering economy and the deep debt burden that it will be facing as the economy recovers. A Treasury official outlining the release of the date called the numbers “striking.”
The Congressional Budget Office projected last month that the federal budget deficit would hit $3.7 trillion for the 2020 fiscal year, which would be its largest size as a share of the economy since World War II.
Much of the decline in government receipts last month was because of the three-month delay of Tax Day to July 15, while a large proportion of the increase in spending was reflected in the economic impact payments and in additional health care spending. April usually yields a surplus. The largest deficit for the month previously came in 2010.
Although Republicans have been increasingly expressing worry about the deficit, it is likely that more government spending is in store. And most economists argue that the massive spending is necessary to prevent the severe economic downturn from becoming even worse. House Democrats released on Tuesday released a proposal for another $3 trillion economic relief bill.
The Fed releases new details about a coming lending program.
The Federal Reserve on Tuesday announced additional details on one of its yet-to-open emergency lending facilities, adding that it will provide detailed public disclosures on who is tapping the program.
The so-called Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, or TALF, will accept bundles of debt backed by a variety of consumer and business debt, including auto loans, student loans, and leveraged loans, as collateral in exchange for loans. The goal is to keep credit markets functioning smoothly.
The Fed did not provide a start date for the program, which was first announced on March 23. It also announced that both the TALF and its Paycheck Protection Program lending facility — which takes small-business loans off bank balance sheets — would provide detailed monthly releases on usage.
Also on Tuesday, lawmakers grilled Randal K. Quarles, the Federal Reserve’s vice chair for banking supervision, on several topics at a Senate hearing, including why the Fed is still allowing banks to pay dividends and whether the central bank is willing to take enough risks to help shore up the economy.
Much of the questioning centered on when the Fed’s Main Street and Municipal Liquidity Facility will get up and running. The programs were first announced in late March and early April, but have yet to get underway, as the Fed takes time to design and put in place efforts they have never tried before.
“I don’t think we’re looking at months, but it would be premature for me to say how many weeks it would be before they’re operational,” Mr. Quarles said during testimony before the Senate Banking Committee on Tuesday.
As restrictions start to lift, anxious workers are pushing to maintain safeguards.
Early in the coronavirus pandemic, workers spoke up and staged protests to demand that employers provide protective equipment, limit customer traffic or even shut down in the interest of safety. As many companies return to business, workers are pursuing a new goal: that employers not prematurely roll back measures they put in place.
The workers speaking out say they are pressing for many of the measures they have pushed for since the pandemic began: more generous and accessible sick leave policies, more protective equipment and better hazard pay.
Employees of Target, some of whom walked off their jobs on May 1 over working conditions, have raised concerns about the company’s decision to resume accepting returns from customers, a service that had been suspended to reduce potential virus exposure.
Some workers at Amazon, who also joined the May Day protests, said they were upset over the end of the company’s policy of unlimited unpaid time off, which many had used to avoid exposure inside warehouses.
Riley Breakell, a Starbucks barista in Connecticut, was reassured in mid-March when the company sent a letter announcing expanded catastrophe pay for those absent because of the pandemic. She appreciated the company’s effort to do right by its employees. But the company has since said those provisions would cease for those “unwilling to work” as stores reopened last week.
A Starbucks spokeswoman said the company was taking several steps to ensure that only healthy employees went to work, such as fever checks and paid leave for those who may be ill.
Uber is said to be in talks to acquire Grubhub.
Uber is in talks to acquire Grubhub, said two people with knowledge of the discussions, aiming to create one giant player in food delivery as more people turn toward those services in the coronavirus pandemic.
It was unclear how advanced the discussions were and whether a deal would come together, said the people, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the talks were confidential.
Representatives from Uber and Grubhub declined to comment. Bloomberg earlier reported the talks.
The discussions are a sign of how the companies are working to capitalize on people’s shifting behavior. With consumers staying home and many restaurants across the country shut down, more people are turning to food deliveries for meals.
But the discussions are also an attempt by Uber to limit damage to its business and find a new path for growth.
Trump says California should let Elon Musk restart Tesla factory.
President Trump said California should allow Tesla to restart its electric car factory in the San Francisco Bay Area “NOW.” His remark came a day after the company’s chief executive, Elon Musk, said he was resuming production in violation of a local order prohibiting him from doing so.
Mr. Trump’s comments are in keeping with his effort to push state and local officials to allow businesses to reopen despite the advice of public health officials, who have called for a more gradual reopening to prevent a surge in coronavirus cases and deaths.
But it is not clear what effect the president’s statement would have on California’s governor, Gavin Newsom, a Democrat, and county officials, most of whom are also Democrats. In addition, the Tesla factory in Fremont, Calif., already appears to be making cars and Mr. Musk has dared local officials to arrest him.
“Tesla is restarting production today against Alameda County rules,” he announced on Twitter on Monday. “I will be on the line with everyone else. If anyone is arrested, I ask that it only be me.”
The county’s health officer has said he hoped to work out an agreement with Tesla to open the plant on May 18. The plant is Tesla’s main source of revenue and has been closed since early April. County officials have not yet authorized the resumption of indoor manufacturing over fears that the coronavirus could spread among large groups working in proximity.
In an email that was sent on Monday and was reviewed by The New York Times, the company’s head of human resources in North America, Valerie Workman, told employees they would be contacted within 24 hours about when to report for work.
The state has authorized a resumption of manufacturing, Mr. Newsom said Monday, but that “we recognize localism” and “if a county doesn’t want to go as far,” local orders would prevail.
In her email, Ms. Workman said employees who were uncomfortable returning to work could stay home on unpaid leave.
Jack Dorsey tells Twitter employees they can work from home forever.
Jack Dorsey, Twitter’s chief executive, told employees on Tuesday that they would not be expected to return to the company’s offices and could work from home forever if they wanted to.
Twitter sent its employees home in early March to help stop the spread of the coronavirus, but Mr. Dorsey had previously said he wanted Twitter’s work force to be more diversified around the world and that he welcomed remote work.
Twitter will reopen its offices no sooner than September, said Jennifer Christie, a vice president of human resources at Twitter.
“If our employees are in a role and situation that enables them to work from home and they want to continue to do so forever, we will make that happen. If not, our offices will be their warm and welcoming selves, with some additional precautions, when we feel it’s safe to return,” Ms. Christie wrote in a blog post.
The Fed jumps into the corporate bond market, buying exchange-traded funds.
The Federal Reserve will make its first foray into corporate bond markets on Tuesday, buying exchange-traded funds, which trade like stocks and provide broad exposure to company debt.
The Fed, which announced on March 23 that it would start buying corporate debt, has said that it will purchase newly issued investment grade bonds and those that trade on the secondary market. It will buy the debt of recently downgraded companies and will tiptoe into junk bonds more broadly via E.T.F.s.
Outright corporate bond buying will start “in the near future,” the Federal Reserve Bank of New York said Monday night. The Fed bought short-term corporate debt known as commercial paper during the 2008 financial crisis, but buying longer-dated debt is new territory for the central bank.
Both the primary- and secondary-market bond-buying programs exist as part of the Fed’s emergency lending authorities, which can keep credit flowing in the economy during times of crisis. The central bank has rolled out several emergency programs since coronavirus lockdowns began, but this will be the first one backed by new congressional funding to get up and running.
Lawmakers earmarked $454 billion for such programs as part of the so-called CARES package, which President Trump signed at the end of March. The Treasury administers those funds, and must sign off on the Fed’s facilities.
Stocks on Wall Street drift after a mixed day in global markets.
U.S. stocks fell and global markets were mixed on Tuesday as reports from China, South Korea and the United States offered sobering reminders to investors of how long and difficult the coronavirus recovery is likely to be.
The S&P 500 rose about half a percent in early trading before turning negative. European markets were broadly higher after a drop in the Asia-Pacific region.
Investors had reasons for concern. Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, a central figure in the U.S. government’s coronavirus response, was expected to warn lawmakers on Tuesday that “needless suffering and death” would result if the country opened up too quickly. In China, the city of Wuhan, which seemed to have tamed its outbreak, has reported six new infections in recent days, while cases have also risen in the northern part of the country.
And fresh data on consumer prices was released, showing that the Labor Department’s index fell 0.8 percent in April, the largest monthly decline since December 2008. The index was weighed down by the collapse in oil prices as airlines canceled flights and drivers stayed home.
Oil prices rose slightly on Tuesday, after Saudi Arabia said it had instructed Saudi Aramco, the world’s largest oil company, to deepen production cuts to help with the world’s glut of crude.
Catch up: Here’s what else is happening.
Walmart said on Tuesday that it would give another round of bonuses to its workers in the United States: $300 for full-time workers and $150 for part-time and temporary workers, for a total of more than $390 million. The retailer said it had committed more than $935 million in bonuses for its workers so far this year.
The theatrical distribution company Solstice Studios said Tuesday that it would release the thriller “Unhinged,” which stars Russell Crowe, in theaters nationwide on July 1. That’s two weeks before Warner Bros. release date for Christopher Nolan’s “Tenet” and three weeks before Disney’s planned release of “Mulan.”
The Transportation Department warned airlines for a second time on Tuesday that they must refund passengers for canceled tickets after receiving about 20,000 consumer complaints in April, up from the 1,500 it receives in a typical month.
Saudi Aramco, the world’s largest oil company, reported Tuesday that its net income fell by 25 percent in the first quarter of 2020 compared with a year earlier. Still, Aramco said it earned $16.7 billion — an amount that may allow it to retain the title of world’s most profitable company. Amin H. Nasser, the company’s president and chief executive, said in a statement that the coronavirus pandemic “impacted” the results, which he called “exceptionally strong” given the situation.
Ryanair, Europe’s largest low-cost carrier, said it would resume 40 percent of its flight network beginning July 1, and institute safety measures like requiring passengers to wear face masks and to request access to the bathroom to prevent lines in the aisles.
Reporting was contributed by Jeanna Smialek, Ben Dooley, Alan Rappeport, Kate Conger, Mike Isaac, Michael J. de la Merced, Noam Scheiber, Kai Schultz, Geneva Abdul, Stanley Reed, Niraj Chokshi, Alexandra Stevenson, Cao Li, Damien Cave, Matt Phillips, Gregory Schmidt, Carlos Tejada, Daniel Victor, Katie Robertson and Kevin Granville."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "The Fed cited job growth as a key reason for raising rates
Among the Fed’s roles are maximizing employment and moderating inflation. Job growth has strengthened steadily since the recession, and the Fed’s policy-making committee said in a statement it expected that progress to continue. Inflation remains weak, but the Fed said it expected prices to start rising more quickly.
Unemployment is falling toward precrisis levels and a new Fed labor market index that tracks a range of data has recovered most of the ground lost during the Great Recession.
Unemployment rate
10
%
8
6
4
The Fed’s
projected
range
2
0
’00
’09
’15
’17
Labor market conditions index
+15
0
–15
–30
–45
’00
’09
’15
Unemployment rate
10
%
8
The Fed’s
projected
range
6
4
2
0
’00
’09
’15
’16
’17
Labor market conditions index
+15
0
–15
–30
–45
’00
’09
’15
But officials remain concerned about sluggish inflation, which is both a sign of economic weakness and an impediment to faster growth.
Inflation
+4
The Fed’s
projected
range
+3
+2
%
+1
Personal consumption expenditures
0
’00
’09
’15
’17
Gross domestic product
+4
%
+3
+2
+1
0
The Fed’s
projected
range
–1
–2
Annual change
–3
’00
’09
’15
’17
Inflation
+4
+3
+2
%
The Fed’s
projected
range
+1
Personal consumption expenditures
0
’00
’09
’15
’16
’17
Gross domestic product
+4
%
+3
The Fed’s
projected
range
+2
+1
0
–1
–2
Annual change
–3
’00
’09
’15
’17
Government borrowing costs will increase as the Fed raises rates
Even as the federal debt grew substantially in recent years, the government’s annual interest payments barely increased thanks to the Fed’s efforts to minimize borrowing costs.
Federal funds target rate
6
%
5
4
3
2
1
0.5%
0
’00
’09
’15
U.S. government net interest outlays
White House’s
projections
$350
billion
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
’00
’09
’15
’17
Federal funds target rate
6
%
5
4
3
2
1
0.5%
0
’00
’09
’15
U.S. government net interest outlays
White House’s
projections
$350
billion
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
’00
’09
’15
’17
As the Fed raises rates, no borrower will feel the pain more acutely than the federal government, the nation’s largest borrower.
Federal debt held by the public
$15
trillion
12
White
House’s
projections
9
6
3
0
’00
’09
’15
’17
$15
trillion
Federal debt held by the public
12
White House’s
projections
9
6
3
0
’00
’09
’15
’17
Mortgage rates are also likely to rise
The Fed has fairly direct control over short-term interest rates, but only indirect influence over the rates on long-term debt. Still, most experts expect long-term rates to rise in coming years, increasing the cost of homes and cars.
30-year mortgage rates
9
%
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Monthly
0
’00
’09
’15
30-year mortgage rates
9
%
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Monthly
0
’00
’09
’15
Savers are likely to see higher rates too
One silver lining: As the Fed raises rates, banks, money-market funds and other savings vehicles are likely to start offering higher returns on safe investments.
1-year CD rates
6
%
5
4
3
2
1
Monthly
0
’00
’09
’15
1-year CD rates
6
%
5
4
3
2
1
Monthly
0
’00
’09
’15"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "A surprise hitch in trade talks between the United States and China spooked investors on Monday, sending Asian stocks tumbling and raising the prospect of a rough day for Wall Street.
Shares in China led the decline, falling more than 5 percent as of midday, after President Trump threatened to raise tariffs against Chinese-made goods to pressure Beijing into reaching a deal. Futures contracts, which try to predict the performance of shares in the United States, suggested that major stock indexes would open lower.
Stock markets in Asia have picked up in recent months on prospects that China and the United States would reach a truce in their trade war. The Chinese economy, the most important growth engine in Asia and one of the world’s largest, has also picked up in recent weeks after a surge of government-driven lending.
Mr. Trump’s comments on Sunday threatened to end that growth, rattling investors across the board. The value of China’s currency weakened, and prices for oil and agricultural products fell.
In China, the Shanghai Composite Index was down 5.4 percent midday.
In Hong Kong, the Hang Seng Index was down 3.3 percent as of midday. Taiwan’s Taiex was down 1.8 percent, while the S.&P./ASX 200 index in Australia was down less than 1 percent.
Markets in Japan and South Korea were closed for holidays on Monday."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Advertisement
Supported by
The New Jobs Numbers Are Pretty Good, Actually
They fell far short of analyst expectations, but they reflect a steady expansion that is more rapid than other recent recoveries.
It’s not as bad as it looks.
That’s the most important thing to take away from Friday’s release of the September jobs report, which found that employers added 194,000 jobs last month, a far cry from the 500,000 analysts expected. The initial response among experts was to wonder whether it called for an exclamation of a mere “oof” or a more extreme “ooooooof.”
But when you peel apart the details, there is less reason to be concerned than that headline would suggest. The story of the economy in the second half of 2021 remains one of steady expansion that is more rapid than other recent recoveries. It is being held back by supply constraints and, in September at least, the emergence of the Delta variant. But the direction is clear, consistent and positive.
Much of the disappointment in payroll growth came from strange statistical quirks around school reopening. The number of jobs in state local education combined with private education fell by 180,000 in September — when the customary seasonal adjustments are applied.
There is reason to think the pandemic made those seasonal adjustments misleading. Schools reopened in September en masse, and employed 1.28 million more people (excluding seasonal adjustments) in September than in August. But a “normal” year, whatever that means anymore, would have featured an even bigger surge in employment. In other words, this might be a statistical artifact of a shrinking education sector earlier in the pandemic, not new information about what is happening this fall.
Or as the Bureau of Labor Statistics put it in its release, “Recent employment changes are challenging to interpret, as pandemic-related staffing fluctuations in public and private education have distorted the normal seasonal hiring and layoff patterns,” which is the government statistical agency equivalent of a shrug emoji.
Another detail in the report that takes some of the sting out of the weak payroll gains was news that July and August numbers were revised up by a combined 169,000 jobs, implying the economy entered the fall in a stronger place than it had seemed.
Meanwhile, the focus on the underwhelming job growth numbers has masked what should be viewed as unambiguously good news.
The unemployment rate fell to 4.8 percent, from 5.2 percent in August. It fell for good reasons, not bad — the number of people unemployed dropped by a whopping 710,000 while the number of people working rose by a robust 526,000. (These numbers are based on a survey of households, in contrast with the payroll numbers that are based on a survey of businesses; the two diverge from time to time, including this month.)
This represents a remarkably speedy recovery in the labor market — attaining sub-5 percent unemployment a mere 17 months after the end of the deepest recession in modern times. By contrast, in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the jobless rate did not reach 4.8 percent until January 2016, six and a half years after the technical end of that recession.
Part of it is the unusual nature of a pandemic-induced recession and part of it is the highly aggressive response of fiscal policymakers to the crisis. But the result is that jobs are abundant and most people who want to work can.
And while participation in the labor force remains well below prepandemic levels and has lots of room for improvement, it is not as bad as it was in that last expansion.
In September, for example, the share of people 25 to 54 who were in the labor force — that is, either working or looking for work — was 81.7 percent. That is still well below 83.1 percent before the pandemic, but considerably better than the 81 percent achieved in January 2016, the point in the last expansion when the unemployment rate got this low.
Labor force participation remains the Achilles' heel of this recovery. Many Americans who have dropped out of the work force — because of whatever mix of burnout, challenges with child care, or ability to live on pent-up savings or government benefits — are not yet back in action.
Notably, even as expanded unemployment insurance benefits expired in early September, there was no surge in participation in the labor force. The labor force participation rate for all adults fell by 0.1 of a percentage point, to 61.6 percent. That suggests that the end of extra-generous job benefits may not be the solution to labor shortage woes that many business groups have argued it would be.
Low rates of labor force participation and the weaker-than-expected job growth numbers are most likely two parts of the same story. Businesses want to hire and expand, and labor shortages are real. But there are fewer workers available to be hired right now than there were before the pandemic.
That makes for good opportunities for Americans who do want to work. It is reflected in higher pay — average hourly earnings in the private sector were up 4.6 percent in September from a year ago. But it is also acting as a constraint on just how fast this recovery can go.
Advertisement"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Supported by
Hiring Remains Strong Even as Fed Tries to Cool Economy
The Labor Department reported 390,000 new jobs in May, as policymakers try to ease inflation without inducing a recession.
Monthly change in jobs
+600,000 jobs
+390,000
in May
+400,000
+200,000
May
’21
Aug.
Nov.
Feb.
’22
May
+600,000 jobs
+390,000
in May
+400,000
+200,000
May ’21
Aug.
Nov.
Feb. ’22
May
American employers extended an impressive run of hiring in May, even as policymakers took steps to cool the economy in an effort to ease high inflation.
The Labor Department reported Friday that employers added 390,000 jobs, the 17th straight monthly gain. The unemployment rate was 3.6 percent for the third straight month, a touch away from a half-century low.
At the same time, the labor force grew by 330,000 people, and the share of adults employed or looking for work continued to edge closer to prepandemic levels.
The data signaled that the Federal Reserve’s initial moves to dial back its monetary support for the economy were — at least so far — not constraining business activity so much that hiring was feeling a pinch.
After the strong rebound from the depths of the coronavirus lockdowns — all but 800,000 of the 22 million jobs that were lost have been recovered — the Fed has shifted its emphasis from maximum employment to its other mandate: price stability. The challenge is to apply its primary tool, a steady series of interest-rate increases, without inflicting a recession.
“I think we’re on sort of what looks like a glide path right now, and that’s good — nothing’s broken,” said Guy Berger, the principal economist at the career-focused social network LinkedIn. “But keep fast-forwarding it a year and the question marks are still big.”
The closely watched indicators include the impact on wages, which have been increasing at a pace not seen in decades, though not enough to keep up with inflation over the past year. The Fed is worried that rising labor costs will be passed along to consumers.
Wages kept rising across industries.
Percent change in average hourly earnings for nonmanagers since January 2019
On that score, the Labor Department report showed little change in trajectory. Average hourly earnings rose 0.3 percent from the previous month, the same pace as in April, and were 5.2 percent higher than a year earlier, compared with a 5.5 percent year-over-year increase in April.
“It’s moderating, but it’s not moderating to a level, I think, where it’s consistent with the Fed’s inflation goals,” said Michael Feroli, chief U.S. economist at J.P. Morgan, said of wage growth. He said the Fed would probably want wages to cool toward an annualized 3.5 percent pace, at the higher end, a rate that officials view as aligned with 2 percent inflation.
The State of Jobs in the United States
Job gains continue to maintain their impressive run, even as government policymakers took steps to cool the economy and ease inflation.
- May Jobs Report: U.S. employers added 390,000 jobs and the unemployment rate remained steady at 3.6 percent in the fifth month of 2022.
- Vacancies: Employers had 11.4 million vacancies in April down from a revised total of nearly 11.9 million the previous month, which was a record.
- Opportunities for Teenagers: Jobs for high school and college students are expected to be plentiful this summer, and a large market means better pay.
- Higher Interest Rates: Spurred by red-hot inflation, the Federal Reserve has begun raising interest rates. What does that mean for the job market?
President Biden gave a nuanced celebration of the jobs data in remarks on Friday, emphasizing recent gains while arguing that a slowdown would be welcome, allowing inflation to ease.
“The point is this: We’ve laid an economic foundation that’s historically strong,” Mr. Biden said. “Now we’re moving forward to a new moment, where we can build on that foundation, build a future of stable, steady growth so that we can bring down inflation without sacrificing all of the historic gains that we have made.”
Stocks declined on Friday and bond yields rose as investors evidently read the report as reinforcing the Fed’s muscular efforts, which risk denting economic growth. “The better the data, the more difficult that a pause or reduced pace of tightening later this year becomes,” analysts at TD Securities wrote in a research report published after the jobs numbers were released.
The continued job gains are among many indications of a vibrant economy. Reports from the nation’s largest banks show checking accounts are still above 2019 levels for nearly all income groups. New bankruptcies and debt-collection proceedings are both at their lowest levels since tracking began in 1999.
Yet those encouraging trends have been at odds with the generally sour national mood, dominated by inflation concerns. U.S. consumer sentiment declined in early May to the lowest since 2011, according to the University of Michigan.
The unemployment rate stayed flat in May.
The share of people who have looked for work in the past four weeks or are temporarily laid off
15%
10
5
3.6%
2019
2020
2021
2022
15%
10
5
3.6%
2019
2020
2021
2022
And with a potential change in the economic cycle, economic security is not evenly distributed among households. If tightening financial conditions prompt businesses to downsize, research shows that “last hired” workers will typically be the “first fired” — and that Black and Hispanic workers and those with less education are particularly vulnerable.
But a broad range of economists and policymakers, including Jerome H. Powell, the Fed chair, stress that more modest wage gains when paired with milder prices will be more sustainable for all workers, who are also consumers, in the long run.
“The Fed at this point is saying, look, we’d rather head off inflationary pressures, because if we have to slam on the brakes, then we’re going to cause a recession and it will be worse for these underserved communities,” said Gerald Cohen, an economist at the Kenan-Flagler Business School at the University of North Carolina. “It’s a challenge, because they want to pull people into the labor force. They know the way to do that is through higher wages. But higher wages can also breed higher inflation.”
For employers, too, the prospective change in the economic picture may not be spread evenly.
“Businesses with high profitability, easy access to capital, the capacity to automate and pricing power are still eager to hire,” said Bill Adams, chief economist at Comerica Bank, a large commercial bank based in Texas. “But businesses that are seeing their margins squeezed by rising costs, like hospitality, or that are seeing demand soften, like retail, are pulling job postings as their outlook softens. And competition for workers is squeezing lower-paying employers out of the job market.”
Richard Canny, the president of Ultimation in Roseville, Mich., is feeling that squeeze. His company’s conveyor belts and simple robots for use in warehousing and distribution sold briskly during the tight labor market, as e-commerce companies sought to make each worker more productive.
With 45 employees, Mr. Canny said, Ultimation has managed to stay at full staffing by raising wages — to $17 to $18 an hour to start, from around $13 to $15 — as well as offering perks like parental leave and partial tuition reimbursement. His white-collar employees have retained the flexibility to work from home. All that, he said, is necessary to compete with big employers in the area like Amazon.
“Small companies historically haven’t had to offer the same kind of benefits as the large ones, but I think that’s changed since Covid,” Mr. Canny said.
Prime-age workers came back to the labor force in May
Share of those ages 25 to 54 who are in the labor force (employed, unemployed but looking for work or on temporary layoff)
At this point in the recovery, labor- and business-oriented economists alike believe that expanding the supply of labor may be even more important than jobs gains themselves.
There are nearly two openings for every job seeker, and several factors are unlikely to change in the near term. Some, like the large cohort of retiring baby boomers, are simply demographic.
More opportunities for women could be part of the answer. Employment of women was up 181,000 in May, yet more than 700,000 below the level in February 2020.
That lag may stem, in part, from the lapse of last year’s child tax credit expansion, argued Elizabeth Ananat, a professor of women and economics at Barnard College, who has researched the program’s effects on parental employment and labor force participation.
The credit gave most families monthly payments of up to $250 per older child and $300 per young child, “helping families weather both inflation and the not-fully-recovered job market, leading to our biggest-ever cuts in poverty for families,” Ms. Ananat said. For families with a child under 5, she said, a quarter of the credit was being spent on child care.
Summer Seay, 34, of Chattanooga, Tenn., worked as a senior customer service representative at Cigna, the health insurer, throughout the pandemic, making $23 an hour. But she left in late April to spend more time caring for her three children while assisting her husband with “more of the paperwork” for the family’s wooden pallet business.
One reason she decided to leave the wage-earning work force was frustration that much of her pay was merely covering child care costs, which had mounted to $700 a week just as the expanded child tax credit expired.
“It kind of went hand in hand,” she said. “Because our big thing is food, feeding the kids.”
Another missing element of the work force are recent immigrants. Goldman Sachs researchers said recently that because of visa restrictions and health protocols during 2020 and 2021, the total number of workers was about 1.6 million below where it would be otherwise. Legal immigration rates and refugee admissions have returned to prepandemic levels under the Biden administration, the analysts found, but are not enough to make up the difference.
Jason Karaian contributed reporting."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Unexpectedly dismal job growth last month cast a shadow on the nation’s economy, as a government report on Friday sent analysts scrambling for adjectives like “dreadful,” “a body blow” and “grim” to describe just how disappointing they found the latest employment figures.
The Labor Department found that the jobless rate held steady at 5.1 percent in September, but wage gains stalled, the labor force shrank and employers created many fewer positions than they had been averaging in recent months. While the latest report is only a snapshot of the economy and the weakness may ultimately prove fleeting, it made clear that ordinary workers are still failing to take home the kind of monetary rewards normally expected from a recovery that has being going on for more than six years.
The new estimates came just two weeks after the Federal Reserve decided that the economy’s advance remained too fragile to risk lifting interest rates from their near-zero level — even as it hinted an increase would come before the year’s end. Now, experts said, signs of a slowdown may well push any rise into 2016.
The odds of a move in December have “clearly diminished,” said Carl Tannenbaum, chief economist at Northern Trust in Chicago. “There’s nothing good in this morning’s report.”
Despite the lagging economy, the mere likelihood that the Fed would yet again postpone a retreat on its stimulus program may have ultimately buoyed some investors’ confidence. After opening sharply down after the Labor Department’s announcement, the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index turned around, ending the day up over 1.4 percent, to 1,951.36. The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury bond dipped below 2 percent.
“That may assure the markets that unconditional support from monetary policy will be sustained,” Mr. Tannenbaum said. “Low for long may go on even longer.”
Diane Swonk, chief economist at Mesirow Financial in Chicago, said the Fed chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, had “really made it clear that she’d like to re-engage those sidelined in recent years by allowing the unemployment rate to fall below what most consider full employment. It’s the only way we’re going to regain living standards lost in recent years.”
The Fed faces an uphill battle, she and other analysts suggested, as the United States now appears to be importing some of the economic malaise that has infected other parts of the world, particularly China and Europe.
Ms. Swonk, who labeled the employment numbers a “body blow,” warned that the economy was likely to be plagued by subpar growth for a while.
Industry has been hurt by the strong dollar and weak global demand; the oil industry has cut back sharply on investment in response to the fall in energy prices; and farming has suffered because of slumping agricultural commodity prices. Last month, the sectors that absorbed the greatest job losses were mining, logging and manufacturing.
By contrast, health care, leisure and hospitality, and professional and business services remained strong, highlighting other signs of sturdiness in the economy that countered the otherwise disheartening jobs news.
Consumer demand at home has been on the upswing and vehicle sales have been strong. And a broader measure of unemployment, which includes part-time workers who want full-time jobs and those too discouraged to even search, dipped to 10 percent in September, its lowest mark since May 2008.
“Against the backdrop of accelerating real consumption, it’s hard to see what’s driving this softening and what could sustain it,” said Ian Shepherdson, chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, sounding a more optimistic note. “We have to expect better numbers next month, and the odds still strongly favor upward revisions, despite the unexpected downward revision to August.”
But Mr. Shepherdson was drowned out by a chorus of more negative reactions to the estimate that employers created only 142,000 jobs in September. Adding to the gloom, the Labor Department revised August’s employment numbers, registering only 136,000 new jobs for that month, well below the 173,000 originally reported.
With Friday’s revision, job gains have averaged just 167,000 a month for the last three months, compared with an average of about 260,000 for 2014. Average hourly wages in the private sector dropped slightly, as did the average length of the workweek.
With the presidential campaign already underway, neither party wasted much time in using the jobs report to attack the other side.
Republicans criticized the president for promoting a program that they argue stifles economic growth. The slowdown may provide a political opening for Republican contenders to attack Mr. Obama and the Democrats on an issue that was not resonating as much with voters when the job market was on the upswing.
In response, President Obama vowed on Friday not to sign another temporary spending measure after the one passed this week in an effort to raise the pressure on Congress to reach a long-term agreement to finance the government.
Speaking to reporters at the White House, Mr. Obama warned that the economy could be endangered by the continual game of budget chicken encouraged by conservative Republicans in hopes of forcing Democrats to give ground on other issues, like health care and the fate of Planned Parenthood.
The short-term spending bill passed this week to pay for government operations only until Dec. 11, he said, was a “gimmick” that “sets up another potential manufactured crisis just two weeks before Christmas.” He added: “This is not the way the U.S. should be operating.”
To prevent a recurrence, he said he would veto any further budget measures postponing a full-fledged spending plan. “I will not sign another shortsighted spending bill like the one Congress sent me this week,” Mr. Obama said. “We purchased ourselves another 10 weeks. We need to use them.”
While overall growth remains on a slow but steady track, the job outlook varies markedly depending on geography, training and industry.
Looking at the feeble rise in median wages, Andrew Chamberlain, chief economist at Glassdoor Economic Research, pointed out that such figures masked a wide disparity among industries. Workers in financial services, construction and graphic design, for example, have on average enjoyed double-digit wage growth from the previous year. Those stuck in neutral or suffering from effective wage declines included those in the manufacturing, retail clothing and textile industries.
The demand for young, high-technology workers has been evident to Isaac Oates, the chief executive of Justworks, a human resources management company that handles mostly small businesses. “We see that a lot of companies are growing quickly” in this area, saying his own firm has grown to 60 workers from 40 over the past three months in order to keep pace.
Other industries, like travel and leisure, have proved more resilient job creators, even if wages have not grown much. An improving housing market has also helped push down the number of unemployed workers with construction experience to its lowest level since 2000, according to the Associated General Contractors of America.
The picture is bleaker for those in the low-skill corners of the economy.
“We’re still finding a lot of skilled jobs come open, but it’s certainly slowed down for the unskilled,” said Robert A. Funk, chairman and chief executive of Express Employment Professionals, a staffing agency based in Oklahoma City with 750 offices.
Skilled workers are at a premium at Advanced Technology Services, a manufacturing consulting company based in Peoria, Ill.
“Where we’re struggling is in the area of talented people in manufacturing,” Jeff Owens, the company’s president, said, mentioning that he would like to add about 160 managers, electricians, information technology workers and machinists to his 3,300-person staff.
Location also matters. Mr. Funk, a former chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, said he observed a slowing down in the last six weeks, with the biggest drop-offs in the oil-drilling states, including Texas, Oklahoma and North and South Dakota.
Others fear that the economy is never going to deliver many gains to workers who have been waiting years to receive any bounty from the upswing in business activity.
William Spriggs, chief economist for the A.F.L.-C.I.O., said: “We’ve pretty much reached a kind of stability, and the unemployment rate will continue to fall, mostly because of retirements.”
An analysis this week from Morgan Stanley noted that the decline in the unemployment rate to 5.1 percent in August, from 5.5 percent in May, was almost entirely attributable to changes in the labor force participation rate. The percentage of the working-age population that is employed — which many economists consider a better indicator of the health of the job market than the official jobless figure — has stayed flat at under 60 percent for several years, still well below its prerecession level of about 63.
Public sector jobs were one of the few bright spots, growing by 24,000 in September, thanks to hiring on the state and local level. But government workers — from teachers to police officers to transit workers — have not made up the lost ground, said Elise Gould, a senior economist at the Economic Policy Institute, a labor-oriented research organization in Washington.
“The number of teachers and education staff fell dramatically during the recession,” Ms. Gould said, “and has failed to recover to anywhere near its prerecession level, let alone the level that would be required to keep up with an expanding student population.”
An earlier version of this article referred incorrectly to the economy. It is heading into the final quarter of 2015, of course — not 2016."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "President Donald Trump has shifted the economy so that once-disregarded blue-collar manufacturing workers are now recovering jobs faster than coastal service-sector employees, the Washington Post acknowledged Sunday.
“Blue-collar jobs are growing at their fastest rate in more than 30 years, helping fuel a hiring boom in many small towns and rural areas that are strong supporters of President Trump ahead of November’s mid-term elections,” said the Post, under the headline “Under Trump, the jobs boom has finally reached blue-collar workers. Will it last?”
According to the Post:
Rural employment grew at an annualized rate of 5.1 percent in the first quarter. Smaller metro areas grew 5.0 percent. That’s significantly larger than the 4.1 percent growth seen in large urban areas that recovered earlier from the Great Recession, according to an analysis by the Brookings Institution’s Metropolitan Policy Program of a separate set of Labor Department data released on Wednesday.
In the past year, the economy has added 656,000 blue-collar jobs, compared to 1.7 million added in the services sector. But the rate of growth in blue-collar jobs is speeding up, while service-sector job growth has hovered around 1.3 percent over the past year.
The New York Times is also admitting that Trump’s economic policies are reaching people outside the Democratic Party’s base of coastal cities — and is also saying pay raises could soon rise faster because companies and investors have run out of alternatives. On Sept 7, the Times reported:
The headlines for the August job numbers released this morning are nothing but good. Employers added a robust 201,000 jobs, the unemployment rate remained at the rock-bottom level of 3.9 percent, and wages grew the fastest they have in nine years.
There’s no doubt that this is the best economy in quite a long time for American workers, who by a wide range of measures can find a job more easily than they have in a decade …
But the fact that higher pay raises are finally showing up in the data is another piece of evidence that employers are coming up against the limits of the labor force. Just maybe, after years of trying every recruitment technique other than raising hourly pay, employers are starting to turn more to that option.
Trump’s economic promises to aid the manufacturing sector were ridiculed before and after the election by the Democratic Party’s progressive elite.
Throughout President Barack Obama’s term, the progressive elite steered opportunities and wealth away from manufacturing sectors, which were deemed to be bad for the environment but ideal for relocation via free-trade deals to China and other Asian economies. The progressives also steered wealth, government spending, and social status towards their service-sector supporters in wealthy coastal cities and in post-graduate career slots. For Obama, Obama repeatedly praised Silicon Valley CEOs, teachers, students, environmentalists, as well as “community organizers.”
Under Trump, however, the economy’s gains are being spread more evenly throughout the nation and across the workforce.
For example, President Barack Obama’s top economic advisor, Jason Furman, posted a chart showing that lower-income workers are seeing the greatest gains:
Neither of the two articles in the Washington Post or the New York Times recognized any role for Trump’s low-immigration/high-wages policy, even though it has modestly reduced the inflow of cheap-labor migrants and penalized companies who hire illegal immigrants.
Trump has also pressured U.S. companies to reduce outsourcing of middle-class jobs via the H-1B and other visa-worker programs which have helped keep salaries flat for many college-graduates for at least two decades.
But Trump’s rising pressure for popular pay-raises before the 2018 election is prompting business groups to step up their lobbying for quick access to more foreign workers.
Business-first GOP Rep. Kevin Yoder added four cheap-labor programs to the 2019 spending plan for the Department of Homeland Security, in the hope that Trump will approve those cheap-labor programs in exchange for extra spending on the border wall.
The Kansas representative’s four-part cheap-labor plan was endorsed by nearly all GOP members on the House appropriations committee in July and likely was backed by GOP leaders.
The middle-class “country caps” outsourcing bill was endorsed by Amazon, IBM and the billionaire founders of FWD.us, partly because it helps many investors continue replacing American graduates with cheap foreign graduates. Yoder says his bill would end discrimination, but it is backed by many business lobbyists and critics say it will boost discrimination against Americans.
Those cheap-labor programs must be stripped from Yoder bill before the election, said RJ Hauman, policy director at the Federation for American Immigration Reform. “We fear the president will sign something [after the election] that does contain that border wall funding despite the other things in it that fly in the face of his agenda,” he said.
Overall, the Washington-imposed economic policy of economic growth via immigration shifts wealth from young people towards older people by flooding the market with cheap foreign labor.
Four million young Americans will join the workforce this year, but the federal government will also import 1.1 million legal immigrants, and allow an army of at least 2 million visa-workers to work U.S. jobs.
That process spikes profits and Wall Street values by cutting salaries for manual and skilled labor offered by blue-collar and white-collar employees. The policy also drives up real estate prices, widens wealth-gaps, reduces high-tech investment, increases state and local tax burdens, hurts kids’ schools and college education, pushes Americans away from high-tech careers, and sidelines at least 5 million marginalized Americans and their families, including many who are now struggling with opioid addictions. Immigration also pulls investment and wealth away from heartland states because investment flows towards the large immigrant populations living in the coastal states.
."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "HONG KONG — The risk that a trade war between China and the United States was entering a dangerous new phase sent global markets lower again on Thursday.
Stocks on Wall Street, which fell more than 3 percent on Tuesday, again slid into negative territory for the year, opening more than 1 percent lower. United States markets were closed on Wednesday in observance of President George Bush’s funeral.
The drop on Thursday followed the arrest of a prominent Chinese technology executive at the request of the United States, which appeared to dash hopes that a trade-war cease-fire reached between the economic giants over the weekend would last.
In recent days, doubts and confusion about that truce have grown, sending markets lower. But news that the chief financial officer of the Chinese tech giant Huawei, Meng Wanzhou, had been arrested in Canada raised fresh uncertainty, not only about the truce, but about the possibility that new phase in the trade war posed substantial risks for the tech companies that have driven major gains for American investors in recent years.
Ms. Meng was arrested in Vancouver on Saturday, even as President Trump and President Xi Jinping of China were dining together in Buenos Aires and agreeing to a 90-day pause in their countries’ trade war. The arrest was expected to renew tensions.
All major markets in Asia ended the trading day down more than 1 percent, and several slid further. Results were grimmer in Europe, where major indexes in London, Frankfurt and Paris had hit their lowest levels in about two years by late morning.
In Asia, the tone for the day was set in Hong Kong, where investors rattled by Ms. Meng’s arrest focused their attention on technology stocks and the overall market dropped 2.5 percent. The shock wave was felt across the border in Shenzhen, where stocks fell 2.2 percent.
In Tokyo, the market fell nearly 2 percent after the governor of the Bank of Japan warned that the trade war would hurt the Japanese economy. Traders in Seoul, South Korea, pushed the market down more than 1.5 percent; stocks in Taiwan were down 2.3 percent.
Concerns persist that the tensions between the United States and China could further slow a global economy already showing signs of cooling.
“The world economy is still expanding at a rapid pace, but cracks are starting to appear in the global growth picture,” Brian Coulton, a chief economist at Fitch Ratings, wrote in a note to clients. Fitch has repeatedly warned of China’s debt binge and the challenges facing the second-largest economy after the United States.
The week began an optimistic note, with the announcement that Mr. Trump and Mr. Xi had reached a deal on the sidelines of the Group of 20 meeting. Stocks around the globe soared on the news.
But a series of tweets from Mr. Trump, who called himself “a Tariff Man” prompted a new round of selling.
The only thing that seems certain is more uncertainty, analysts said.
“While the likelihood of an ongoing dialogue after months of no discussions and the pause on tariffs are still positive developments, it’s clear that negotiations will be challenging and a source of volatility,” Mark Haefele, chief investment officer at UBS wealth management, said in a note to clients."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Retail Sales Jump and Jobless Claims Drop in New Signs of Recovery: Live Updates
Jobless claims fell last week to their lowest level of the pandemic, renewing confidence in a dynamic economic revival.
About 613,000 people filed first-time claims for state unemployment benefits last week, the Labor Department said Thursday, a decrease of 153,000 from the previous week.
In addition, 132,000 filed for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, a federal program that covers freelancers, part-timers and others who do not routinely qualify for state benefits. That was a decline of 20,000 from the previous week.
Neither figure is seasonally adjusted.
In another sign of the recovery underway, Retail sales surged in March, the Commerce Department said on Thursday, as Americans spent their latest round of government stimulus checks and the continued roll out of coronavirus vaccines lured more people back into stores.
The 9.8 percent increase last month was a strong comeback from the nearly 3 percent drop in February.
With the pandemic’s end seemingly in sight, the economy is poised for a robust comeback. But weekly applications for unemployment claims have remained stubbornly high for months, frustrating the recovery even as businesses reopen and vaccination rates increase.
“The job market conditions for job seekers have really improved extremely quickly between January and now,” said Julia Pollak, a labor economist at the job site ZipRecruiter. “But there are still huge barriers to returning to work.”
Jobless claims for the next few months could remain much higher than they were before the pandemic as the labor market adjusts to a new normal.
Concerns about workplace safety persist, especially for workers who are not yet vaccinated. Many children are still attending schools remotely, complicating the full-time work prospects for their caregivers.
But there is hope on the horizon as those barriers begin to fall. President Biden moved up the deadline for states to make all adults eligible for vaccination to April 19, and every state has complied. Students who have been learning remotely will begin to return to the classroom in earnest.
“This was the deepest, swiftest recession ever, but it’s also turning into the fastest recovery,” Ms. Pollak said. “And I don’t think we should lose sight of that just because some of the measures are a little stubborn.”
Retail sales surged in March, the Commerce Department said on Thursday, as Americans spent their latest round of government stimulus checks and the continued roll out of coronavirus vaccines lured more people back into stores.
The 9.8 percent increase last month was a strong comeback from the nearly 3 percent drop in February, when previous stimulus money had dissipated and a series of winter storms made travel difficult across much of the United States.
The rebound in March sales shows how, a year after the nation’s economy locked down to prevent the spread of the virus, consumer spending remains highly dependent on government support. It also reflects that many areas of consumption frozen by the pandemic have bounced back. Sales of clothing and accessories rose 18 percent, while restaurants and bars saw a 13 percent increase.
President Biden’s $1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan, which was signed into law last month, provides direct payments of $1,400 to lower-income Americans. Many of these checks began arriving in households toward the end of last month, when economists saw signs that spending was ramping up again, such as increased hotel occupancy and travel through airports.
Economists at Morgan Stanley had predicted that core retail sales would jump 6.5 percent in March, driven by the stimulus checks that started arriving in people’s bank accounts around March 17. The investment bank said 30 percent of consumers tend to spend their checks within the first 10 days, suggesting that many other consumers have yet to spend their checks, which could strengthen April sales.
More broadly, American consumers are also feeling increasingly optimistic as more people become vaccinated and venture out more frequently. One measure of consumer confidence, tabulated by the Conference Board, said confidence increased about 20 points in March from February, fueled by increased income and stronger business and employment expectations.
Advertisement
Reuters will begin charging for access to its website as it tries to capture a slice of the digital subscription business.
The company, one of the largest news organizations in the world, announced the new paywall on Thursday, as well as a redesigned website aimed at a “professional” audience wanting business, financial and general news.
After registration and a free preview period, a subscription to Reuters.com will cost $34.99 a month, the same as Bloomberg’s digital subscription. The Wall Street Journal’s digital subscription costs $38.99 a month, while The New York Times costs $18.42 monthly.
Reuters.com attracts 41 million unique visitors a month. Months of audience research showed that those readers were divided in two separate groups: those wanting breaking news and professionals looking for context and analysis about how news affected their industry, Josh London, chief marketing officer at Reuters, said in an interview.
Reuters will roll out new sections on its website for subscribers in coming weeks that include coverage of legal news, sustainable business, energy, health care and the auto industry. It also plans to introduce industry-specific newsletters.
Mr. London described the new website as “the largest digital transformation at Reuters in a decade.” He declined to provide specifics on digital subscription goals but said that it represented “a major opportunity for us.”
Arlyn Gajilan, the digital news director at Reuters, said she expected to expand the digital team working on the revamped website.
On Monday, Reuters announced that Alessandra Galloni, a global managing editor, would become its next editor in chief. Ms. Galloni, who will be the first woman to helm the news agency in its history, starts her new role on Monday. She takes over from Stephen J. Adler, who retired after running Reuters for a decade.
Ms. Gajilan said that Ms. Galloni had been closely involved in the new direction of Reuters.com.
“She’s a very strong advocate for all things digital at Reuters,” Ms. Gajilan said.
U.S. stocks are set to rise when trading begins on Thursday as more companies report first-quarter earnings and retail sales data is expected to show a big increase in spending in March.
The S&P 500 was expected to open 0.5 percent higher, futures indicated.
After a bumper market debut, Coinbase shares rose 11 percent in premarket trading. On Wednesday, the cryptocurrency exchange ended its first day of trading at $328.28 a share, valuing the company at nearly $86 billion — more than 10 times its last valuation as a private company.
Shares in Bank of America rose 2.5 percent in premarket trading after the company reported better-than-expected revenue from sales and trading. The bank joins its peers in reporting a jump in earnings. On Wednesday, executives at Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo all delivered upbeat economic forecasts.
Retail sales rose 5.8 percent in March, according to economists surveyed by Bloomberg, rebounding from a 3 percent drop the previous month.
Elsewhere in markets
Yields on 10-year U.S. Treasury notes dropped to 1.61 percent. On Wednesday, Jerome H. Powell, the chair of the Federal Reserve, reiterated the central bank’s intention of keeping monetary policy accommodative for a long time. He said the bank would probably slow its bond-buying program “well before” it lifts its policy interest rate.
European stock indexes also rose. The Stoxx Europe 600 index increased for a third straight day. It was up 0.3 percent to a record high.
The Russian ruble dropped 1.2 percent against the dollar on Thursday. The Biden administration is expected to announce a string of measures against Russia, including financial sanctions for the hacking of government and private networks and a range of other activity.
Shortages of semiconductors, fueled by pandemic interruptions and production issues at multibillion-dollar chip factories, have sent shock waves through the economy. Questions about chips are reverberating among both businesses and policymakers trying to navigate the world’s dependence on the small components.
Most attention has focused on temporary closings of big U.S. car plants. But the chips are in everything from cash registers and kitchen appliances, and the problem is affecting many other sectors, particularly the server systems and PCs used to deliver and consume internet services that became crucial during the pandemic, Don Clark reports for The New York Times.
“Every aspect of human existence is going online, and every aspect of that is running on semiconductors,” said Pat Gelsinger, the new chief executive of the chip maker Intel who attended the meeting with the president on Monday. “People are begging us for more.”
The chip shortage potentially affects just about any company adding communications or computing features to products. Many examples were described in 90 comments filed by companies and trade groups to a supply chain review by President Biden, including a laundry list of needs from industry giants like Amazon and Boeing.
Dan Rozycki is the president of a small engineering firm, that sells small sensors used to monitor construction sites to ensure concrete is hardening properly. His firm is for now among the lucky chip users. It planned ahead and has enough chips to keep making the roughly 50,000 sensors it supplies each year to construction sites. But his distributor has warned him it might not be able to deliver more of them until late 2022, he said.
“Is that going to halt those projects?” Mr. Rozycki asked. He is scouring the market for other distributors that might have the two needed chips in stock. Other possibilities include redesigning the sensors to use different chips.
Advertisement
An international coalition of 35 children’s and consumer groups called on Instagram on Thursday to scrap its plans to develop a version of the popular photo-sharing app for users under age 13.
Instagram’s push for a separate children’s app comes after years of complaints from legislators and parents that the platform has been slow to identify underage users and protect them from sexual predators and bullying.
But in a letter to Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook — the company that owns the photo-sharing service — the nonprofit groups warned that a children’s version of Instagram would not mitigate such problems. While 10- to 12-year-olds with Instagram accounts would be unlikely to switch to a “babyish version” of the app, the groups said, it could hook even younger users on endless routines of photo-scrolling and body-image shame.
“While collecting valuable family data and cultivating a new generation of Instagram users may be good for Facebook’s bottom line,” the groups, led by the Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood in Boston, said in the letter to Mr. Zuckerberg, “it will likely increase the use of Instagram by young children who are particularly vulnerable to the platform’s manipulative and exploitative features.”
The coalition of nonprofit groups also includes the Africa Digital Rights’ Hub in Ghana; the Australian Council on Children and the Media; the Center for Digital Democracy in Washington; Common Sense Media in San Francisco; the Consumer Federation of America; and the 5Rights Foundation in Britain.
Stephanie Otway, a Facebook spokeswoman, said that Instagram was in the early stages of developing a service for children as part of an effort to keep those under 13 off its main platform. Although Instagram requires users to be at least 13, many younger children have lied about their age to set up accounts.
Ms. Otway said that company would not show ads in any Instagram product developed for children younger than 13, and that it planned to consult with experts on children’s health and safety on the project. Instagram is also working on new age-verification methods to catch younger users trying to lie about their age, she said.
“The reality is that kids are online,” Ms. Otway said. “They want to connect with their family and friends, have fun and learn, and we want to help them do that in a way that is safe and age-appropriate.”
A former editor at Vanity Fair has been working to create a new digital publication, in which writers will share in subscription revenue — Vanity Fair meets Substack. The new company behind the publication, Heat Media, hopes to unveil it in the coming months, four people with knowledge of the matter said. The start-up is partly the brainchild of Jon Kelly, a former editor at Vanity Fair. One of the backers is the private equity firm TPG, which would take three seats on the Heat Media board, the people said. Another investor is 40 North, a related investment arm of Standard Industries, a global industrials company, the people said. Heat Media has raised around $7 million so far, according to the people.
Kimberly Godwin, a veteran CBS News executive, was named the next president of ABC News on Wednesday, making her the first Black woman to lead a major broadcast network’s news division. Ms. Godwin succeeds James Goldston, who announced his departure from ABC in January. She will begin in her job in early May. Ms. Godwin most recently served as CBS’s executive vice president of news."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Advertisement
Supported by
Unemployment Claims Rise Sharply, Showing New Economic Pain
Weekly filings for jobless benefits hit the highest level since July as the pandemic’s resurgence batters the service industry.
Ten months after the coronavirus crisis decimated the labor market, the resurgent pandemic keeps sending shock waves through the American economy.
Though more than half of the 22 million jobs lost last spring have been regained, a new surge of infections has prompted shutdowns and layoffs that have hit the leisure and hospitality industries especially hard, dealing a setback to the recovery.
The latest evidence came on Thursday when the Labor Department reported that initial claims for state unemployment benefits rose sharply last week, exceeding one million for the first time since July.
Just days earlier, the government announced that employers had shed 140,000 jobs in December, the first net decline in employment since last spring, with restaurants, bars and hotels recording steep losses.
“We’re in a deep economic hole, and we’re digging in the wrong direction,” said Daniel Zhao, senior economist with the career site Glassdoor. “The report obviously shows that the rise in claims is worse than expected, and there is reason to think that things are going to get worse before they are going to get better.”
That prospect is all the more troubling because a major element of the relief package signed by President Trump last month — a $300 weekly federal supplement to other unemployment benefits — is set to run out in mid-March.
President-elect Joseph R. Biden Jr. has said he will push a new stimulus package through Congress to provide a lifeline for workers and employers until the pandemic can be brought under control. His plan will include direct payments to most households along with aid to small businesses and local and state governments.
The recent economic data has brought a new sense of urgency to such efforts, with millions struggling to make ends meet even as more job losses could be in the offing.
The Labor Department said on Thursday that 1.15 million workers filed initial claims for state unemployment benefits during the first full week of the new year. A further 284,000 claims were filed for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, an emergency federal program for freelancers, part-time workers and others normally ineligible for state jobless benefits. Neither figure is seasonally adjusted. On a seasonally adjusted basis, new state claims totaled 965,000.
Before the pandemic, weekly filings typically totaled around 200,000.
The holidays may have held down unemployment claims in previous weeks, with people waiting until the new year to submit claims. But several economists expressed skepticism that filing delays were a major driver of the uptick in claims last week.
“I don’t think there’s any question that on the margin, there could be some unusual things going on,” said Mark Hamrick, senior economic analyst at Bankrate.com. “But we have to think also about the fact that these are not our grandfather’s unemployment lines — meaning much of this is done digitally. I think if one just tries to understand human nature, it doesn’t make a lot of sense that someone would be delaying a request for financial assistance when they’re out of work.”
More likely, economists say, is that the $300 federal supplement prompted an increase in demand for benefits.
Confusion over the new federal aid — which Mr. Trump spent several days threatening not to sign — may also have temporarily slowed down claims for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, which fell during the week ending Jan. 2. The increase last week brought the numbers more in line with the previous elevated levels.
Those seeking new work have found diminishing prospects. Hiring slowed for five straight months before December’s outright reversal. In November, even before the recent surge in virus cases, the number of workers officially counted as unemployed outnumbered job openings by more than four million, according to the Labor Department.
And the Economic Policy Institute, a left-leaning research group, says the number of workers displaced by the pandemic is far higher than the 10.7 million officially counted as unemployed in December. By the institute’s calculation, after adjusting for misclassification and undercounting and factoring in those considered to have quit the labor force, 26.8 million workers are jobless or have seen a drop in hours and pay because of the pandemic.
Even with the new federal aid for the unemployed in last month’s legislation, there are continuing concerns about the processing of payments — a task left to the states — after problems with the initial round of emergency benefits last spring.
“States are extra cautious now to get as much guidance as possible,” said Michele Evermore, a senior policy analyst at the National Employment Law Project, a nonprofit workers’ rights group. But she said some states, including New York, seemed better equipped to move quickly this time, taking an “ask questions later” approach.
She said she expected that by next week most states would have “a significant piece” of their program up and running, if not all of the components.
In addition to the $300 weekly supplement and the short-term renewal of benefits for gig workers and the self-employed, the latest round of federal aid renewed Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Compensation, a program for those whose state benefits have run out.
The disparate nature of state unemployment programs, some of which provide as little as 12 weeks of benefits in normal times, has made them a target for Democrats. Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon and the incoming chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, has said he will press for an overhaul of the nation’s unemployment benefits system.
As part of his economic recovery plan, Mr. Biden will seek congressional approval of an automatic renewal of federal unemployment benefits and other aid until the jobless rate falls to a given level. That would alleviate the need for repeated legislative action in times of crisis.
In the meantime, as the coronavirus pummels the service sector, employers are likely to cut more jobs in the weeks ahead. Some struggling businesses may not survive.
“When I look at the situation of the pandemic and the health situation, people are still scared of the virus, as they should be, and that is going to have an economic impact,” said AnnElizabeth Konkel, an economist at the career site Indeed. “The virus is the root of all that is going on right now.”
Still, economists and analysts see better times ahead, possibly as soon as the spring. As more people are vaccinated, cases will begin to fall, which will ease restrictions on businesses and could lead to a resurgence in consumer activity. Warmer weather could allow more people to gather outside, slowing the spread of the virus, as it did last year. A new stimulus package could also alleviate some of the pandemic’s economic pain.
Yet even when the coronavirus does become contained, economists say that an upswing will not happen overnight.
“As we get into the second quarter, the economy should begin to heal,” Mr. Hamrick of Bankrate said. “But clearly, all of this has taken much longer than anyone expected, and probably the healing will take some time as well.”
Jim Tankersley contributed reporting.
Advertisement"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "More than 40 million people — the equivalent of one out of every four American workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the coronavirus pandemic grabbed hold in mid-March, the government reported on Thursday, an astounding tally that rivals the bleakest years of the Great Depression.
The latest additions — the 2.1 million people who filed state unemployment claims last week — may not be only a result of fresh layoffs, but also evidence that states are working their way through some of the choking backlog.
“We’re still catching up,” Diane Swonk, chief economist at the accounting firm Grant Thornton, said of the newest claims. “The lags have been long.”
The Labor Department report marks the eighth week in a row that new jobless claims, on a seasonally adjusted basis, dipped from the peak of almost 6.9 million — but the level is still far above any other historical highs.
6
million
40.8 million
5
Claims were filed in
the last 10 weeks
4
Initial jobless claims, per week
Seasonally adjusted
3
2
RECESSION
1
’06
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
6
million
40.8 million
5
Claims were filed in
the last 10 weeks
4
3
RECESSION
2
Initial jobless claims, per week
Seasonally adjusted
1
’06
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
At the same time, overcounting in some places and undercounting in others makes it difficult to precisely measure the number of layoffs caused by the pandemic — and in devising a policy response.
“When we think about what to do when benefits expire, it would be helpful to know how many people are actually getting them,” said Elizabeth Pancotti, a research assistant at the National Bureau of Economic Research. While the Labor Department reports may be the best source of information, she said, they offer an “incomplete picture.”
Shelter-in-place orders and business restrictions have been lifting across the country, and there is evidence in the report that some workers are being called back: The number of people receiving state jobless benefits dropped by roughly 3.8 million to 21.1 million for the week ended May 16.
But as Ms. Swonk noted, “it’s not enough to offset the extraordinary economic devastation and job losses associated with Covid-19.”
And while rehiring certainly accounts for a chunk of that decline, workers who had exhausted their weekly state benefits would also be reflected.
Reopenings remain bumpy and incomplete, and flare-ups of the coronavirus continue to disrupt business. On Tuesday, Ford Motor temporarily halted production at the Kansas City assembly plant in Missouri to deep clean after an employee tested positive for the virus. Two other Ford plants — in Chicago and Dearborn, Mich. — were also temporarily closed.
In Thursday’s report, the department offered two sets of figures. One includes the more than 40 million people who have applied for state benefits and is seasonally adjusted. The other includes those who applied under the new federal emergency program called Pandemic Unemployment Assistance and is not seasonally adjusted. So far, more than 10 million have applied.
Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, part of an expanded palette of jobless benefits passed by Congress two months ago, is meant to help freelancers, gig workers, the self-employed and others who would not normally qualify under state rules.
But several economists suspect that there is a lot of double counting and warn against simply adding figures from the two programs together.
Some states, flooded with applicants, were slow to put the pandemic program into effect. Initially, many people were mistakenly told they were ineligible. Others were instructed to apply for state benefits first and be rejected before applying for the federal benefits.
That confused application process has caused potentially millions of laid-off workers to be counted twice. States are also weeding out duplicate applications from frustrated filers who had trouble getting through or did not receive any response after weeks of waiting.
Then there are the mistakes. A data entry slip-up caused Massachusetts to pump up the number of federal claims by nearly a million last week. The previous week, a similar flub in Connecticut mistakenly inflated its total by a quarter of a million.
“It’s unclear if states are including duplicate claims due to error, fraud or the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program,” said Ernie Tedeschi, a policy economist at Evercore ISI in Washington.
But that is not all. That system is also probably missing millions of other laid-off workers.
As of Tuesday, three states had not put the pandemic unemployment insurance program into effect, and several others have yet to report any claims. Thirteen states have not started another federal emergency relief program, to provide an additional 13 weeks of benefits to workers who have exhausted their state benefits.
Laid-off workers who have not applied for benefits and those who have left the labor force entirely are not included in the claims numbers. Nor are any of the eight million undocumented workers who lost their jobs. They are not eligible for any benefits. Neither are new graduates just entering the labor force.
Matthew Wilson, 24, who lost his barista job in Philadelphia, was turned down because he had been working in the state for less than a year.
“It doesn’t make any sense — I moved, and now I’m magically not qualified for unemployment?” said Mr. Wilson, who relocated to Pennsylvania after graduating from Tufts University in Massachusetts last year. He appealed the decision and heard last week that his claim had been approved, but he hasn’t received any money. His partner, who also lost her job as a barista, has applied four times but has yet to collect benefits.
As for regular unemployment benefits, states draw up their own rules and administer benefits. The result is that in some places, like Florida, Texas and Arizona, only a small fraction of jobless workers are receiving benefits, while other states offer much broader coverage.
The way “initial claims” are counted may also vary by state, with some excluding claims that have not been processed.
Laurie Yadoff, a lawyer at Coast to Coast Legal Aid of South Florida, said she had about 100 clients who qualify for regular state benefits but have had trouble filing. Many are poor and older, with limited or no access to the internet. “A lot of them fall into the regular state benefit program, and a lot of them are straightforward, and a lot of them are still not getting money,” she said.
Even when Ms. Yadoff has been able to get someone on the phone, the person at the other end often doesn’t know the answer. “People are desperate and frustrated,” she said. “They don’t know what to do.”
Monitoring withdrawals from the Treasury Department, Mr. Tedeschi of Evercore estimated that by early May, roughly three-quarters of those eligible for benefits had started to receive them.
Allison Hester, who is 50 and lives in Little Rock, Ark., applied for unemployment after being laid off from her job in content marketing at a window cleaning supply company in March, but was never able to get through. “I tried on and off for a month, but our system was so overwhelmed.”
She returned to her job this month. “It feels good, but I don’t feel secure anymore,” Ms. Hester said. “I don’t take anything for granted.”
Nelson D. Schwartz and Tiffany Hsu contributed reporting."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "More than three million people filed for unemployment benefits last week, sending a collective shudder throughout the economy that is unlike anything Americans have experienced.
The alarming numbers, in a report released by the Labor Department on Thursday, provide some of the first hard data on the economic toll of the coronavirus pandemic, which has shut down whole swaths of American life faster than government statistics can keep track.
Just three weeks ago, barely 200,000 people applied for jobless benefits, a historically low number. In the half-century that the government has tracked applications, the worst week ever, with 695,000 so-called initial claims, had been in 1982.
Thursday’s figure of nearly 3.3 million set a grim record. “A large part of the economy just collapsed,” said Ben Herzon, executive director of IHS Markit, a business data and analytics firm.
The numbers provided only the first hint of the economic cataclysm in progress. Even comparatively optimistic forecasters expect millions more lost jobs, and with them foreclosures, evictions and bankruptcies. Thousands of businesses have closed in response to the pandemic, and many will never reopen. Some economists say the decline in gross domestic product this year could rival the worst years of the Great Depression.
And there was fresh evidence on Thursday of the relentless course of the virus itself. Cases in the United States now exceed 80,000, the most of any nation, even China and Italy, according to a New York Times database, and more than 1,000 deaths across the country have been linked to the virus.
At least 160 million people nationwide have been ordered to stay home. Many hospitals are overwhelmed, while essential protective gear is in short supply. “We are the new global epicenter of the disease,” said Dr. Sara Keller, an infectious-disease specialist at Johns Hopkins Medicine. “Now all we can do is to slow the transmission as much as possible.”
The situation in the New Orleans area is particularly acute, with the city reporting more than 800 cases, a higher total than most states.
In New York, the state hardest hit, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo reported a 40 percent increase in hospitalized patients in one day, to well over 5,000. The surge dashed hopes that had been raised a day before, when Mr. Cuomo said the state’s social-distancing measures seemed to be slowing the growth in hospitalizations.
President Trump said the federal government planned to designate areas as being at high, medium or low risk for spreading the virus to guide local decisions on imposing or relaxing restrictions on movement and commerce.
The terrifying speed of the U.S. economic collapse from the pandemic has spurred lawmakers to action. Late Wednesday night, senators agreed on a $2 trillion aid package that would provide cash payments to nearly all Americans and would expand the unemployment system, among other changes. Final congressional approval is expected on Friday.
The legislative action has helped buoy financial markets. A three-day rally has lifted stocks in the S&P 500 index more than 17 percent, including a rise of 6.2 percent on Thursday, though prices remain far lower than they were a month ago.
As staggering as the figures are for jobless claims, they almost certainly understate the problem. Some part-time and low-wage workers don’t qualify for unemployment benefits. Nor do gig workers, independent contractors and the self-employed, although the emergency aid package passed by the Senate would broaden eligibility to include many of them. Others who do qualify may not know it. And the sudden rush of layoffs led to jammed phone lines and overwhelmed computer servers at unemployment offices across the country, leaving many people unable to file claims.
The evening that Elise Quivey, 25, heard she was being furloughed from her job in Chicago as a web designer for a cruise ship company, she immediately clicked on the state’s unemployment benefits website. The pages wouldn’t load. The next morning, as she tried to fill out the online form, error messages kept flashing.
Days of calling have resulted in nagging busy signals. She is hoping that her claim made it through, and that she will receive aid within a few weeks, but she is not optimistic.
“There’s so many things up in the air right now, and it’s so stressful,” she said. “It’s a wreck.”
Despite the glitches, Thursday’s figures suggest the scale of the problem. In a single week, the pandemic wiped out a year and a half of job gains. The past two weeks’ claims alone would be enough to push the unemployment rate up to 5.7 percent from 3.5 percent in February — a half-century low that now seems like ancient history.
The worst could be yet to come. Mr. Herzon of IHS Markit said he expected a similarly large number next Thursday, when the Labor Department releases its report on new claims filed this week.
Some forecasters think the unemployment rate could hit 10 percent this summer, which would equal the highest level from the last recession more than a decade ago. Back then, it took nearly two years for the jobless rate to reach that height.
“What is really hard to fathom is just how fast these numbers are going to escalate,” said Carl Tannenbaum, chief economist at Northern Trust.
Still, while there is little doubt that the numbers will get worse in the short term, some economists remain optimistic that the pain will be relatively short-lived. The congressional relief package is intended to, in effect, press “pause” on the economy, allowing idled workers and shuttered businesses to keep paying their bills so that they can spring back quickly once the health crisis eases. If it works, the recovery could be relatively swift; if it doesn’t, the cascade of layoffs and business failures could stretch on far longer.
Quintina Moore-Caraway, a ramp agent at George Bush Intercontinental Airport in Houston, was at work on March 13 when her supervisor called her over. She was being furloughed, without pay, at the end of her shift.
“They said I could finish out my day on Friday, don’t come in on Saturday, and I haven’t been back since, with no pay,” she said.
Ms. Moore-Caraway, 46, was barely getting by on the $10 an hour she earned at the airport. She has no savings, and no idea how she will pay her $688 rent bill on April 1. She hasn’t been in the job long enough to qualify for unemployment, and the few places still hiring during the pandemic aren’t near bus routes.
“Through all the hurricanes, floods, I’ve never seen anything like this,” she said. “On the movies I have, not in real life.”
Low-wage workers — many of them black, like Ms. Moore-Caraway, or Hispanic — have been hit especially hard by the sudden economic reversal. Many work in the industries most affected by the outbreak, such as restaurants and travel, and few can work from home. They are also less likely to have sick leave or other paid time off, and they have less money saved to help overcome a missed paycheck.
Black and Hispanic workers “always bear the brunt” of economic slowdowns, said Alix Gould-Werth, a researcher at the Washington Center for Equitable Growth, a left-leaning think tank. “Now they’re bearing the brunt of these twin crises, the health crisis and the economic crisis.”
Some help may be on the way for workers like Ms. Moore-Caraway. Under the congressional aid package, most families would receive $1,200 per adult and $500 per child in direct payments. The bill would also increase unemployment benefits by $600 a week and extend how long laid-off workers could receive benefits. And it would waive some requirements for receiving jobless benefits, like the requirement that recipients look for work.
It would not, however, expand the food-assistance program formerly known as food stamps.
An earlier relief bill, passed by Congress last week, provided $1 billion to help state unemployment systems that are breaking under the stress of record call volumes. Departments across the country reported huge spikes in call volumes and online applications.
The surge in applications was a particular challenge because departments were staffed — and funded — for a labor market that had until recently been setting records for its strength.
Colorado’s Department of Labor and Employment had 70 people working on unemployment claims before the coronavirus outbreak. It added 90 people to help respond to calls and process claims on Monday, pulling them off other jobs in the department. Roughly 80 percent of workers are at home, while the rest are in a call center in downtown Denver that during the last recession had hundreds of workers dealing with claims.
“Where we maybe had eight months to prepare heading into the recession, we had five days to respond to coronavirus,” said Cher Haavind, the department’s deputy executive director.
On Monday, nearly 100,000 call attempts were made by 10 a.m., when the call center normally receives 6,000 calls in an entire week. The department put in place a new process under which those filing claims submit their forms at specified times based on their last names. Even so, Ms. Haavind said, the crush of applications has strained not just the department’s systems but also its employees.
“They are talking to stressed-out people, and they are also stressed out,” she said.
For laid-off workers, the anxiety is racking.
Mere weeks ago, Bill Copperfield had steady work installing drywall in commercial buildings in Hawaii. Then he caught a cold and, in the suddenly cautious world of coronavirus, was told not to come to work, meaning he wasn’t paid. By the time he was healthy again, the job had shut down and the state government was telling nonessential workers to stay home. He has tried repeatedly to file an unemployment claim, but hasn’t managed to get through.
“So right now I am three weeks without income and I’ve got my rent coming up, I’ve got food I’ve got to buy,” Mr. Copperfield said. “Definitely I won’t be paying bills this month.”
Mr. Copperfield, 45, has been laid off in the past, including during the 2008-9 housing crisis, in which he ended up losing his home to foreclosure. But even then, he said, he was able to go out and find work as a handyman or even sell fish he caught.
“At least then I could go out and hustle work, even if it wasn’t in my field,” he said. “Nobody can work right now, we’re on like lockdown. And even if I could find side work, I’d be putting my family at risk.”"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Red states are slashing federal unemployment benefits as Republicans and businesses complain of a “worker shortage” in the economic recovery from the coronavirus pandemic.
More Republican-led states may soon join Montana and South Carolina in cutting off the extra $300 and benefits for gig workers that Congress put in place amid unprecedented layoffs stemming from social distancing measures that have forced businesses to close or operate at reduced capacity.
South Carolina Gov. Henry McMaster (R) called the extra benefits a “dangerous federal entitlement, incentivizing and paying workers to stay at home rather than encouraging them to return to the workplace.”
Republicans have always said jobless pay discourages work, and businesses always complain they can’t find enough workers willing to accept their wages, but the complaints have been supercharged by the unprecedented federal support ― Congress has never added hundreds of dollars to weekly benefits before ― and the rush to reopen businesses as vaccines spur a return to normalcy.
GOP lawmakers blamed the added benefits for a disappointing jobs report Friday that showed employers added only 266,000 jobs in April, far fewer than economists predicted, with the jobless rate ticking up to 6.1%.
“While there are certainly people that needed access to increased unemployment benefits during the heart of this pandemic, we should not be in the business of creating lucrative government dependency that makes it more beneficial to stay unemployed rather than return to work,” Sen. Roger Marshall (R-Kan.) said in a statement on Friday, accusing the Biden administration of causing a “government imposed labor shortage.”
Marshall said he planned to introduce legislation next week that would repeal enhanced unemployment benefits nationwide. The federal benefits are already set to expire in early September.
The Senate could be headed for a dramatic clash over unemployment, as Democrats hope to reform the state-federal unemployment system in a way that would probably disallow states from cutting benefits as often as they do.
Sen. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.), chair of the Senate Finance Committee, said it’s “deeply disturbing” what Republican states are doing.
“Enhanced jobless benefits helped save the economy by ensuring millions of families could pay rent and buy groceries during this crisis,” Wyden said. “Cutting off all benefits while millions of workers have not yet been able to return to work could cause tremendous financial pain and sabotage our economic recovery.”
Georgia labor officials have been debating such a move for weeks, Georgia Commissioner of Labor Mark Butler told HuffPost on Friday. “It’s being seriously considered,” he said.
Officials in Wyoming told Politico on Friday they were also considering an early end to federal benefits.
But April’s jobs report was not actually a slam dunk for benefits-haters. It showed more than 300,000 job gains in the leisure and hospitality industry and more than 400,000 workers returning to the labor force last month. In other words, people are returning to work and restaurants are hiring in a big way, despite their complaints.
“It may be that so many employers are re-opening so quickly, that it will take a few months to fill open positions, but this is a temporary problem not an endemic one,” Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics, said in an email.
“The disappointing April jobs numbers was due to weakness in industries that we know are or will continue to be very strong, such as construction, couriers, vehicle manufacturing, employment agencies, and educational services,” Zandi said, adding that he expected big job gains in the coming months.
President Joe Biden, meanwhile, called Friday’s jobs report a “rebuttal” to those who say unemployment benefits are keeping Americans from returning to work. He said the real issue was simply that millions of jobs had been wiped out by the coronavirus pandemic.
“I know some employers are having trouble filling jobs ... the economy still has 8 million fewer jobs than when this pandemic started. More workers are looking for jobs and many can’t find them. The virus stole jobs,” Biden said in remarks on the economy at the White House.
Asked if he saw a connection between unemployment benefits and slow job growth, Biden said, “No, nothing measurable.”
Republicans said that when Congress added $600 to unemployment benefits last year, it would crush hiring. Instead, hiring surged and the unemployment rate plummeted from its shocking high of 14.8% last April.
Nevertheless, the war over added unemployment benefits is likely to escalate in the coming weeks. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce, an influential lobbying group on Capitol Hill, especially among Republicans, signaled it planned to push lawmakers to end the jobless assistance.
“The disappointing jobs report makes it clear that paying people not to work is dampening what should be a stronger jobs market,” Neil Bradley, the group’s chief policy officer, said in a statement. “We need a comprehensive approach to dealing with our workforce issues and the very real threat unfilled positions poses to our economic recovery from the pandemic. One step policymakers should take now is ending the $300 weekly supplemental unemployment benefit.”"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "WASHINGTON ― One of the biggest economic arguments this year was over whether extra unemployment benefits made it impossible for employers to hire.
Republican governors cut the federal compensation early, and Democrats made no effort to keep the benefits in place, even though they didn’t agree that the money hurt hiring.
But the past several months have strongly suggested that the extra jobless pay wasn’t holding back hiring after all. The federal benefits fully expired early in September — and instead of surging, job growth slowed dramatically that month.
Meanwhile, there remain an unprecedented 10 million job openings, and some businesses still complain they can’t find workers. What’s going on?
The likeliest explanation is that there is still a pandemic.
Susan Peterson of Fort Lauderdale, Florida, has worked as an adjunct college professor most of her adult life, but in recent years had been working as a substitute teacher. She hasn’t set foot in a classroom since March 13, 2020, when the pandemic shut everything down.
Peterson, 79, said she accepted a position teaching English as a second language at a technical college in July, but wound up deferring her September start date on the advice of a doctor who said she should stay out of schools until the delta variant isn’t spreading as much.
Peterson needs the money. She spent much of her career in teaching jobs that didn’t make Social Security payroll contributions, so her retirement benefit is less than $300 per month. Her state unemployment benefit paid only $89 per week after Florida discontinued the extra $300 that had been provided by the federal government.
It’s just not worth getting sick.
“I like to work,” she said. “I love my students, but I feel like I should wait till spring. Maybe things will change.”
More than 3 million people avoided work out of fear of catching COVID-19 in September, roughly the same number who avoided work for that reason back in June, before the delta variant had taken off. But 4 million said they were sick with the disease or caring for someone who was, up from 1.7 million in June, according to an analysis of federal survey data by Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics.
“There is a long list of reasons why it has been difficult for businesses to fill the record number of open positions, and while the extra unemployment insurance benefits is on the list, it is towards the bottom,” Zandi said in an email. “Sick workers and fear of getting sick are at the top of the list.”
Even as job openings declined slightly from their summer peak, more people voluntarily quit. That shift has lined up with the surge in the delta variant, as Elise Gould, an economist with the left-leaning Economic Policy Institute, has pointed out.
For more than a year, Republicans have decried the federal unemployment benefits as employment killers. Those benefits were first approved by both Republicans and Democrats under former President Donald Trump at $600 per week, and then again at $300 per week, in 2020.
Republicans escalated their complaints once President Joe Biden was in office, claiming that Democrats were paying people not to work and causing a widespread labor shortage. Democrats extended the $300 per week federal unemployment benefit, paid out on top of state unemployment benefits, through the beginning of September in the American Rescue Plan, the multitrillion COVID-19 relief bill passed in March.
“We shouldn’t have policies in place that disincentivize people from returning to the workforce,” Sen. Rick Scott (R-Fla.) said at the time.
That sentiment was echoed by Republicans all summer.
Their claims were backed anecdotally by restaurant and hospitality-sector business owners who were finding it difficult to hire workers, even as businesses began to open up. Republican governors across the country cut federal unemployment benefits short over the summer, refusing to use the funds approved by Congress and arguing that the cutoff would push people back to work and put an end to the labor shortage.
But the states that cut benefits didn’t see stronger job gains than the states that didn’t. And now that the benefits have fully expired, the latest data from the U.S. Labor Department showed weaker hiring and little change in the labor participation rate.
Republicans still say the extra benefits are to blame for the ongoing hiring woes.
“We’ve given people so much money they’re not working,” Scott told HuffPost on Tuesday. “I mean, look at how much money people put away because they got so much extra money.”
Scott added that other benefits, such as the expanded child tax credit, are also keeping Americans home. The credit pays parents as much as $300 a month per child through the end of this year, and Democrats are hoping to extend the policy indefinitely.
“There’s so much money washing around out there, it’s hard to get people back at work,” Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), another vocal unemployment critic, told HuffPost. But he expects the employment numbers to get better now that people have been cut off.
Federal data do show that middle-income households have more savings than usual, which Zandi said is likely a result of unemployment benefits and the three rounds of stimulus checks Congress approved since last year. Most households will probably burn through that money within months.
Peterson, for her part, had to apply for a grant to get her roof fixed this year. It’s not a pile of savings that’s kept her from working these past few months.
“I have less than $300 in my bank account,” she said."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "President Joe Biden could stop Republican-led states from fully cutting federal unemployment benefits, at least according to labor advocates and Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.), but Biden seems uninterested.
More than a dozen Republican governors have said they’ll cancel federal unemployment programs, which provide an extra $300 per week plus benefits for gig workers, because beneficiaries supposedly aren’t eager enough to take jobs.
Sanders told Labor Secretary Marty Walsh in a letter Thursday that the law creating the program for gig workers actually gives the federal government no leeway to let states kill the benefits.
“It is critical that the Department of Labor does everything in its power to ensure that jobless Americans continue to receive this aid as the law intended,” Sanders wrote.
The Labor Department offered a noncommittal response.
“Secretary Walsh and the Biden Administration have been doing all they can to take concrete action to prevent anyone from falling through the cracks as we know unemployment benefits have served as a vital lifeline for workers throughout the pandemic ― to help them buy food, pay rent and remain healthy,” a department spokesman said in an email to HuffPost on Thursday.
It’s not a huge surprise that the Biden administration isn’t jumping into a fight with Republican governors over the benefits. Red states started announcing cuts last week amid widespread complaints of a “worker shortage.” Biden has denied that benefits are causing a worker shortage, but on Monday, he reminded workers that they’re not allowed to keep their benefits if they refuse suitable job offers.
“If you are receiving unemployment benefits and you are offered a suitable job, you can’t refuse that job and just keep getting the unemployment benefits,” Biden said in a special appearance at the White House.
More than a million workers will start losing federal benefits next month as states cease participating in programs that lawmakers intended to last until September. Many of the workers will simply revert to regular state benefits, meaning they’ll get a few hundred dollars or less per week, just without the extra $300.
But most of the affected workers are enrolled in federal long-term benefits or the special benefits program for people ineligible for regular unemployment because they hadn’t been laid off from a traditional payroll job. It’s called Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, or PUA. Congress created the program as a backstop for regular state benefits, which don’t cover workers like ride-share drivers. They will be cut off entirely.
Here’s why Sanders says Biden shouldn’t let those benefits go: The part of the law that created the gig worker program — the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act — says the U.S. labor secretary “shall” pay those benefits to all eligible workers. In federal law, “shall” is a strong word implying the government can’t decide not to do something.
The National Employment Law Project, a worker advocacy group, wrote to Walsh earlier this week saying the Labor Department must either force states to keep the PUA benefits or pay them itself.
“Without exercising one of these options, or developing their own ability to take and pay claims, DOL will not only cause significant harm to our most vulnerable, it will be in direct violation of their duty to provide PUA benefits under the CARES Act,” NELP said.
Sanders has embraced the NELP analysis, saying that not only must the government continue paying PUA claims, it has to pair them with the extra $300, too. Workers enrolled in long-term benefits, which states are also canceling, could switch over to PUA.
But Senate Finance Committee Chair Ron Wyden (D-Ore.), who helped write the law and has said the Labor Department should explore its options, stopped short of endorsing the Sanders approach.
“We want them to use every bit of legal authority to protect workers,” Wyden told HuffPost on Thursday, declining to specifically endorse the idea of forcing benefits to continue.
In response to the coronavirus pandemic, Congress created the weekly supplement, the gig worker benefits, plus a program for people whose jobless spells outlast state benefits. States voluntarily opt in to each program through an agreement with the Labor Department.
Congress initially added $600 to weekly benefits, which Republicans incorrectly predicted would prevent hiring. After the $600 expired last summer, the Trump administration unilaterally created a Lost Wages Assistance program, giving workers an extra $300 for six weeks. (Congress subsequently added a $300 supplement in December.) Some questioned the Trump administration’s legal authority to create the wage assistance program, but even Republican states embraced it. The Biden administration, at least so far, seems unwilling to go out on a limb to help workers in a similar way.
The law does appear to obligate the Labor Department to make sure eligible individuals receive the PUA benefits, said Indivar Dutta-Gupta, co-director of the Georgetown University law school’s Center on Poverty and Inequality. Someone who gets cut off could sue.
“There’s a plausible case to be made through a court of law that the Biden administration needs to get them these payments through some state agreement,” Dutta-Gupta said."
frame of article is: government
###
article: "President Joe Biden denies that unemployment benefits keep workers from taking available jobs, but on Monday Biden said workers had better not stay on unemployment if they’ve had a good job offer.
“The law is clear, if you are receiving unemployment benefits and you are offered a suitable job, you can’t refuse that job and just keep getting the unemployment benefits,” Biden said, in a brief address on the nation’s economy Monday.
Biden’s statement Monday amounts to less of a policy change than a rhetorical shift amid increasingly shrill Republican criticism of federal unemployment benefits.
Republicans have targeted the American Rescue Plan’s unemployment benefits, which affords the jobless an additional $300 a week on top of state benefits through September, as the main driver behind continued high unemployment levels. Several Republican-run states have already said they’ll cancel federal benefits, and criticism intensified on Friday after the Labor Department announced disappointing job growth in April.
On Monday, Biden reiterated that his administration doesn’t see “much evidence” of unemployment benefits keeping Americans home.
“I think the people who claim Americans won’t work even if they find a good and fair opportunity, underestimate the American people,” Biden said. “We still have 8 million fewer jobs than we did when the pandemic started, and for many of those folks, unemployment benefits are a lifeline. No one should be allowed to game the system and we will insist the law is followed, but let’s not take our eye off the ball.”
The White House house announced Monday that the Labor Department would “clarify” current law for unemployment eligibility, which says that “workers may not turn down a job due to a general, non-specific concern about COVID-19 and continue to receive benefits.” That’s pretty much what it already says on the Labor Department’s website.
Last year as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act Congress added extra money to weekly state benefits and also greatly expanded eligibility, allowing employees to claim benefits if they were diagnosed with COVID-19 or if a health care provider told them to quarantine due to conditions making them more susceptible to severe illness.
The Donald Trump administration opted for a somewhat strict interpretation of the eligibility rules, urging states to yank benefits from workers who refused jobs. In January, the Biden administration touted new Labor Department guidance outlining certain circumstances when workers could refuse unsafe jobs and keep their benefits.
Biden on Monday also told the Labor Department to help states reimpose work search requirements that Congress lifted at the outset of the pandemic. Most states have already done so, requiring claimants to certify to the government that they’re available for work and applying for jobs every week.
The Labor Department will work with states “to put in place appropriate work search requirements as the economy continues to rebound, vaccinations increase, and the pandemic is brought under control,” according to a White House fact sheet.
Stricter work search requirements are a reasonable interim step as the economy recovers, said Andrew Stettner, an unemployment policy expert with The Century Foundation.
“I would prefer states to tighten up work search requirements, but leave the pandemic benefits in place until September, than just cut people off altogether,” Stettner said.
The extra federal benefits will expire in September unless Congress extends them. Republicans said last year the supplemental aid would kill hiring, but millions returned to work and the unemployment rate plunged from its high of 14.8%. But now, with people vaccinated and local governments relaxing social distancing rules, Republicans and employers have renewed their criticism.
Business owners are quick to cite a labor shortage when struggling to hire, with some blaming unemployment benefits, but others pointing to factors like a lack of access to child care preventing former workers from coming back.
The child care industry received $40 billion in direct funding through the American Rescue Plan — a major chunk of that in grants for providers to cover payroll costs, rent and protective gear. The Biden administration said new Department of Health and Human Services guidance to states would help get the money out the door so more parents can return to work.
Come July, American families will also be able to benefit from a child allowance-like program through the American Rescue Plan, in the form of an expanded child tax credit, when the IRS will start sending out up to $300 a month per child."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "But congressional Republicans have said they are concerned that some workers are making more money on unemployment insurance than if they were on a payroll and therefore have less incentive to return to work or find a new job.
“You can extend some assistance, but you don’t want to pay people more unemployed than they’d make working. You should never make more than your actual wages,” said Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.), who said he raised the issue with Trump during the lunch. While Trump did not explicitly say he would not sign another bill if it contained a benefit boost, Graham said “he agrees that that is hurting the economic recovery.”
Many economists fear cutting off the benefit extension could hamper the economic recovery. Government spending on unemployment benefits rose by $45 billion from February to April, offsetting slightly more than half of the decline in private wages and salary, according to a recent study by the Brookings Institution. Republicans have maintained that the higher benefit will give workers an incentive to stay at home rather than go to work, but eliminating the massive cash infusion could further depress demand amid fears consumers are already cutting back dramatically on spending.
Trump’s advisers have expressed confidence the economy will quickly recover, a view at odds with many economists.
Sign up for our Coronavirus Updates newsletter to track the outbreak. All stories linked in the newsletter are free to access.
At the lunch, Trump also implored Senate Republicans to take their time on the next phase of coronavirus legislation to get it right — according to the officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss a private conversation — mirroring the strategy of senior Republican leaders who have argued that lawmakers should hit pause before passing another massive rescue package.
“There may be some more needs out there,” Sen. Kevin Cramer (R-N.D.) told reporters following the lunch. “After we get back, and after the next week when we get back, we’ll take a look and see what we can, and keep focused on the things that are necessary and helpful.”
House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) also told reporters Tuesday morning that he “doesn’t see the need right now” to negotiate with Democrats on new virus response legislation.
The unemployment benefits weren’t the only provisions pushed by Democrats that Trump signaled opposition to during the lunch with GOP senators. The president, a vocal critic of voting by mail, also objected to language in the House Democratic plan passed last week that expands voting options ahead of the November elections, including mail-in balloting, according to two of the officials.
Despite being a critic of the practice, Trump — who is now registered to vote in Florida — has voted by mail, including in 2018 and earlier this year.
Jeff Stein contributed to this report."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Class warrior Elizabeth Warren still worth millions, latest financial filings show
Democratic presidential hopeful and class warrior Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., is still worth millions, new financial records show -- as she pushes a new wealth tax aimed at millionaires and billionaires.
According to Warren’s presidential candidate personal financial disclosure, obtained by The Center for Public Integrity, Warren is worth somewhere between roughly $4 million and $10 million. The exact number is not clear as the report includes ranges for various investments and income streams, rather than exact amounts.
ELIZABETH WARREN APOLOGIZES TO CHEROKEE NATION FOR TAKING DNA TEST TO PROVE NATIVE-AMERICAN ROOTS
The center reports that she’s earning some money from book royalties from various publications. But the bulk of her wealth is held in bond and mutual funds, as it has been for years. The forms also show Warren retaining her title as “emeritus professor” at Harvard.
Warren’s wealth has been no secret, but could become a political target in 2020 for anyone looking to chip away at her image as a left-wing economic populist who has rallied for everyday workers against big banks and the ultra-rich.
Warren has taken a consistently hard-left approach to taxation, tax avoidance and income inequality. Last month, she called for a “wealth tax” on Americans with more than $50 million in assets. Warren's filing indicates she would fall below that threshold.
"We need structural change. That’s why I’m proposing something brand new – an annual tax on the wealth of the richest Americans. I’m calling it the 'Ultra-Millionaire Tax' & it applies to that tippy top 0.1% – those with a net worth of over $50M," Warren tweeted.
She went on to claim that it would generate almost $3 trillion over 10 years.
CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP
Her pitch is likely to be greeted positively by the party’s base, which has shown signs of lurching to the left in recent years -- with 2020 candidates following and embracing once-fringe policies such as a Green New Deal and "Medicare-for-all."
Warren has announced an exploratory committee for a presidential run, and is expected to formally announce her candidacy on Saturday."
frame of article is: government
###
article: "Last week, Britain voted to leave the European Union.
Well, at least part of it did.
If you look at the map above, it's hard to miss the geographical split among British voters in the E.U. referendum results. Scotland and Northern Ireland clearly voted to remain and are now grumbling that they might try to block the vote or leave the United Kingdom. More dramatic still, Londoners are demanding independence from Britain, noting that they, too, voted en masse to remain in the E.U.
If such a scenario were to play out, as fantastically unlikely as it is, it is possible that one day a post-Brexit Britain would simply be a rump state of Wales and England, missing its enormous capital city. In the spirit of the now-infamous "Brexit" portmanteau, perhaps it could be called "Wangland" ("Engles" might be more palatable, though it sounds a bit too English).
No one is predicting that such a state will exist anytime soon, but it's worth imagining what it would look like. Not only for what it could say about some unlikely future state, but also what it may say about the very real situation Britain finds itself in.
A new geography
Here's the geography of this new country. Obviously, the giant hole where London is seems a bit unusual, but, geographically, enclaves such as this aren't totally unheard of: San Marino is completely surrounded by Italy, for example, and Lesotho by South Africa.
For the sake of fairness, we'd give this new nation the big non-London cities, including those that voted "remain," such as Manchester, Liverpool and Cardiff. Birmingham, the largest city to vote to "leave" the European Union, could be the seat of this new country's government.
Even so, in terms of size, the country would clearly be diminished. The United Kingdom is 94,525 square miles — about the same size as Romania or, to put it in U.S. terms, Michigan. If Scotland, Northern Ireland and London all left, it would be closer to 58,000 square miles — slighter bigger than Bangladesh and about the size of Iowa.
A new population
There would also be a shift in terms of population. According to the Office of National Statistics, the population of the U.K. is 65,110,000, which puts it just behind France and at about 22nd in rankings (no U.S. states come anywhere close to this number, unfortunately).
Meanwhile, Scotland has 5,473,000 people, Northern Ireland has 1,851,600, and greater London has 8,539,000. This means that our new nation's population would be 49,246,400 — a drop in the rankings to 10 million behind Italy and 4 million above Spain. It is also worth noting that London's population has been growing almost twice as fast as the rest of England in recent years. It is thought that by 2024 the city will reach 10 million in population, though how that would change under an independent status is hard to predict.
In terms of demographics, there'd be plenty of change. London is a truly international city, the destination for 38 percent of international migrants who arrive in England and Wales, according to the ONS. In the 2011 census, 81.9 percent of the population across the U.K. classified themselves as "White British," which is fairly close to the figure for just England and Wales (80.5 percent). However, only 44.9 percent of Londoners considered themselves White British. If London, along with Scotland and Northern Ireland, were to leave the United Kingdom, the rest would be 86.56 percent White British.
Politics in this new country may be very different, too. It was widely noted ahead of the Scottish referendum in 2014 that if Scotland left the U.K. (and took its Scottish National Party and left-wing Labour constituencies with it), the right-wing Conservative Party could be assured the majority in Parliament for the foreseeable future. With the Labour Party making up the vast majority of London's representatives in Parliament, the Conservatives would have an even greater advantage and the future of the country Labour Party would look grim.
The anti-E.U. U.K. Independence Party would probably do well, however. The party has little support in Scotland, Northern Ireland or London, and it could well hold more sway in a smaller parliament.
A new economy
Gross domestic product across the entire United Kingdom is $2.5 trillion, according to Eurostat figures from 2014, which makes it second only to Germany ($3.2 trillion) in the E.U. Those same statistics show that Scotland has a GDP of $190 billion, Northern Ireland has a GDP of $53 billion, and London has $563 billion. Thus, the GDP of a new nation without these three pieces would be around $1.7 trillion, which means it would drop from second to fourth in Eurostat's rankings of GDP.
The reality, of course, is more complicated than that. It's hard to overestimate how much London has contributed to the U.K. economy. Although it is an enormous city, it clearly punches above its weight — contributing 22 percent of the total gross value added (GVA) for the entire United Kingdom, even though it has only 13 percent of the population. The ONS has also estimated that Londoners pay more in taxes than they take in from government spending. Meanwhile, the city's economy continues to grow faster than the rest of the country.
When international firms come to Britain, they tend to set up base in London. They have good reason, too — the city is the country's hub for media, arts, technology and much more. Its position as a financial center may be unparalleled around the world: London was recently ranked the top financial center in the world by the Global Financial Centers Index, overtaking New York.
And the economy isn't all about London, either. Another factor might be whether Scotland keeps control of oil in the North Sea.
Exactly how this London-less nation would be able to adapt is unclear. It does have some major economic hubs, including greater Manchester and Birmingham, and it would benefit by keeping the majority of Britain's esteemed centers of higher education — including Oxford and Cambridge universities. And though it would miss out on finance and other service industries, it would have much of Britain's manufacturing industry.
The reality of the situation
Okay, okay, don't get too excited yet: This is far from a sure thing. Scottish, Northern Irish and London-based voters may be angry at the result of Thursday's referendum, but any plot to secede isn't going to happen in the immediate future (with the possible exception of Scotland).
The map at the top of the post may also suggest a Britain more divided than it actually is. In many parts of England and Wales, the vote was relatively even and only slightly in favor of "leave." The same is true in some "remain" areas in Scotland, Northern Ireland or London.
But it's hard to deny that there is a divide. London dominates the country like few other cities in other nations. Scottish and Irish voters, with their separate identities, may have looked to the E.U. as a counterweight to that, but voters in England and, to a lesser extent, Wales (which has been intertwined with England for far longer than Scotland and Ireland) don't seem to see it the same way.
This probably doesn't come as a surprise to most British readers. Fears of London's domination have been around for a long time — a few years ago, the BBC moved much of its operations to Salford, outside Manchester, in a bid to counter its bias toward the capital.
With the Brexit vote, the reality of this is starting to set in. In the aftermath of the referendum, many "remain" voters flooded social media to reveal that they didn't even know any "leave" voters.
Perhaps they're living in a different country already.
More on WorldViews
Brexit campaign wipes website clear, sparking speculation it is hiding its promises
Millions of Brits signed a petition for another E.U. referendum. They shouldn’t hold their breath.
Anger on the streets of London after Britain votes to leave the European Union"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "British Prime Minister Theresa May heads to Europe this week to try to wrangle more Brexit concessions from the European Union.
It won’t be easy. The Europeans have driven a tough bargain, offering very little to May and her Brexiteers. Experts say they don’t think they have to compromise: The European Union wants to make leaving seem as painful as possible for Britain, so other countries don’t try it.
Britain, on the other hand, has a lot to lose.
“No deal is a catastrophe,” said Peter Kellner, a visiting scholar at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and former president of the online survey research company YouGov. “There will be huge impulses, huge determination in Parliament to stop that from happening."
Without a plan in place, the country could find itself unable to import or export goods to E.U. countries. Its planes and trains could be prevented from traveling to the European Union without onerous regulations, as might its citizens.
But the European Union would suffer from a no-deal withdrawal, too.
“Europe doesn’t want a no-deal Brexit because; while it would be catastrophic for Britain, there are European businesses that would be affected,” Kellner said. “Motor industries, pharmaceuticals. There are a whole host of industries where parts flow between E.U. countries and Britain.”
In July, the International Monetary Fund warned that while Britain would bear the brunt of the economic losses, a hard Brexit would cause the E.U.’s economic growth to fall by as much as 1.5 percent by 2030.
“It’s hard for me to see how [no deal] would benefit the E.U. at all,” said Amanda Sloat, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. “By nature of the single market, you’ve got a heavily integrated economy that would come to a screeching halt.”
The United Kingdom is one of the European Union’s three largest trading partners, making up 13 percent of its trade in a bloc that imposes no barriers.
“The strength of euro area-UK integration implies that there would be no Brexit winners,” the IMF said in July, according to the Guardian.
Sloat said that, in addition to trade, a hard Brexit runs the risk of being immediately financially detrimental to the European Union. If Britain leaves without a deal in hand, it’s possible it won’t pay its “divorce bill” of about $51 billion. In December 2017, Britain agreed to pay that sum to cover the costs of leaving.
But in September, May and then-Brexit negotiator Dominic Raab suggested they may not pay up if no deal is met.
Perhaps most concerning to Europe, should the U.K. crash out of the bloc, would be the issue of borders. More than 3 million E.U. citizens live in the United Kingdom, while more than 1 million Britons live in the European Union. With freedom of movement within the European Union, British and E.U. citizens can move in and out of their nation states. A hard Brexit would create major confusion around who can stay and under what circumstances.
Even so, it’s unlikely the bloc will renegotiate any legally binding parts of the withdrawal agreement. Reopening the 585-page agreement runs the risk of allowing 27 individual nation states to readdress their qualms with it.
That leaves part of the E.U.’s fate in May’s hands as she attempts to miraculously find a consensus in Parliament for the deal as it stands.
Read more:
As E.U. leaders gather in Brussels over Brexit, Britain’s May says no to reelection"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "* Send any friend a storyAs a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.,

Prime Minister Theresa May signing the letter laying out Britain’s withdrawal from the European Union. The delivery of that letter to Brussels on Wednesday formally began the process.

Pool photo by Christopher Furlong

LONDON — The world did not end. No recession unfolded. Nine months after Britain voted to leave the European Union, disregarding warnings of grim economic consequences, a nation famous for calmly carrying on has seemingly gone about its business.

As Prime Minister Theresa May on Wednesday officially initiated Britain’s exit from Europe — Brexit, in everyday talk — the lack of disaster was touted by those steering the departure as a sign of little trouble ahead.

“There were predictions about what would happen to the economy if the United Kingdom voted to leave,” Ms. May told Parliament on Wednesday. “Those predictions have not proved to be correct. We see a strong economy.”

But the reassuring talk did not reckon with one significant detail: Nothing has actually happened yet.

Mrs. May has only set in motion the complex, politically fraught divorce proceedings through which Britain must settle its affairs with the 27 jilted members of the European Union. The outcome will almost certainly be costly: Britain has placed in jeopardy its trading relationship with Europe, its largest customer for exports, while imperiling London’s status as banker to the planet.

The markets essentially shrugged. The move was as expected as the next Super Bowl. The pound dipped a tad. So did shares on London’s stock market.

The immediate impact of Mrs. May’s action was to start negotiations on future dealings across the English Channel. Those talks have a two-year deadline. If no deal is struck before then, Britain and Europe would plunge into a state of chaotic uncertainty.

Trade would revert to the rules of the World Trade Organization, making Britain’s exports to Europe vulnerable to tariffs and other barriers to commerce, including health and safety rules.

London’s bankers would be effectively severed from Europe, with many transactions for clients based on the Continent rendered illegal.

Until now, such issues were wrapped in layers of hypotheticals, with the details left for some indeterminate day when Britain’s government would make it real. That day has come.

Though the financial industry has been preparing to move jobs to other financial capitals in anticipation of a messy Brexit, other industries have waited for clarity. Now, they will feel pressure to act — shifting some lines of business to European capitals, perhaps shelving British expansions.

Global banking giants like Citigroup, HSBC and JPMorgan Chase may soon carry out plans to shift thousands of jobs to financial centers in the European Union. Goldman Sachs recently confirmed that it is moving hundreds of jobs out of London while expanding offices in Frankfurt and Paris.

Vodafone, the telecommunications giant, said after the referendum that it might shift its headquarters from London.

“The fact of setting this clock ticking is significant, because two years for many businesses is enough time for them to adapt, but short enough that they have to start making decisions really quickly,” said Nicolas Véron, an economist and senior fellow at Bruegel, a research institution in Brussels. “You will start to see very observable, concrete consequences of Brexit very soon.”

Britain has exploited its inclusion in Europe’s vast single market to make itself a dominant hub for multinational companies as various as aviation, pharmaceuticals and finance. They have set up factories, marketing teams and trading floors in Britain while selling to clients from Ireland to Greece, as if this swath of geography — home to some 500 million people — were one country.

So much for all that.

European leaders have consistently reaffirmed that remaining in the single market requires that Britain accept the free movement of people. That collides with a primary aim of many Brexit supporters — restricting immigration.

After months of pretending that a finesse could be found, Mrs. May in January declared her government’s choice: enter immigration limits, goodbye single market.

Long before this political reckoning with reality, executives at global banks were already mulling which jobs to move from London to other cities in the European Union — Dublin, Frankfurt, Paris, Amsterdam, Luxembourg.

“People will have to move,” said William Wright, founder and managing director of New Financial, a research institution in London. “There’s no other option.”

Predicting how many jobs will move has become a thriving cottage industry. Oliver Wyman, the global consultancy, concluded that if, as now seems likely, transactions in London for European clients are sharply curtailed, as many as 35,000 British jobs could disappear with as much as 20 billion pounds ($24.8 billion) in revenue.

Estimates suggest that as many as 35,000 British jobs could disappear with a split from the E.U. as companies seek offices elsewhere. Some global banks have plans to re-establish jobs outside of London.

Chris J Ratcliffe/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images

After the Brexit vote, Mrs. May met with Nissan’s chief executive to offer assurances that her government would do what was necessary to keep auto manufacturing competitive. Nissan said it would continue to make sport utility vehicles in Sunderland, a city in northern England.

Brexit supporters called the outcome a template for how a pragmatic British government would prevent businesses from abandoning its shores — with tax cuts, friendly regulation and deal making. But if Britain promised anything meaningful to Nissan, it probably violated World Trade Organization rules. Nissan has since said it continues to assess the uncertain economics of Britain. Ford and BMW are reassessing their British factories, too.

For now, Britain has managed to avoid the most frightening economic forecasts.

Before the referendum last June, the British Treasury predicted that a vote to exit could shrink the economy by as much 6 percent annually for the first two years.

The economy expanded by 1.8 percent last year. British consumers continued to spend. British factories continued to churn out cars, medical devices and aircraft parts, many of them destined for Europe.

This month, Toyota announced plans to sink an additional £240 million (about $297 million) into a factory in Derbyshire, though it qualified that it required reliable access to Europe. Snap, the parent company of social media darling Snapchat that raised $3.4 billion in an initial public offering, recently picked London as its international headquarters.

But consumer spending has been increasingly paid for by debt. The British pound has surrendered 17 percent of its value against the dollar since the referendum, raising the cost of imported goods. Investment is flagging.

A weaker pound helps exports, making British goods cheaper on world markets. But exports have also been aided by the very thing Britain is trying to ditch — inclusion in Europe.

Video

The British government invoked Article 50, the provision that starts negotiations on the country’s exit from the European Union.

Justin Tallis/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images

Proponents of Brexit tend to dismiss Europe as a land leading only in the numbers of unemployed men who are moving in with their parents. Britain’s next era is supposed to be centered on trade with faster growing, innovative nations like the United States.

Britain and Europe must negotiate a trade deal that will prevent a rupture to commerce. During the campaign, Brexit supporters argued that Europe would ultimately make it happen because its most powerful member, Germany, now sends a parade of BMWs, Audis and Volkswagens to Britain.

But trade negotiations are vulnerable to the manipulations of politically protected industries. This one seems particularly prone to acrimony. European leaders confront existential threats to their union, with political parties across the Continent hostile to its powers. Many are intent on using Britain to illustrate what they contend happens when a member leaves — nothing good.

“It’s common sense,” said Mr. Véron, an economist. “You don’t allow someone who leaves the club to have better terms than someone who’s in the club, or otherwise the club doesn’t mean anything.”

Even if European leaders seek middle ground, any one of the member nations could hijack the proceedings with their demands while the clock ticks away. Last year, a single province of Belgium nearly scuppered a trade deal negotiated between all of Europe and Canada in seeking favor for its dairy farmers.

In a bid to stake out a stronger negotiating position, Mrs. May has threatened to walk away if Europe does not extend good terms. “No deal for Britain is better than a bad deal,” she said in January.

Whatever the comparative rankings of unfortunate events, Britain’s leaving Europe sans deal would be bad, as economists and people running businesses have said.

It is often said that businesses fear uncertainty more than anything. Mrs. May just eliminated some of that. But she replaced it with an apparent certainty that presents its own troubles: Britain really is departing the largest consumer market on earth."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "HONG KONG — Struggling to respond to precipitous declines on China’s stock markets over the last three weeks, the country’s biggest brokerage firms unveiled a government-endorsed plan on Saturday to buy shares starting on Monday, in a bid to stabilize the markets.
The government-controlled Securities Association of China said that 21 big brokerage firms had agreed to set up a fund worth at least 120 billion renminbi, or $19.4 billion, to buy shares in the largest, most stable companies, and would stop liquidating their own portfolios of shares. But some experts said that this might not be enough to stop the hemorrhaging of money from the stock market, particularly given that $105 billion in shares changed hands in Shanghai on Friday.
The association did not specify whether the fund would be allowed to use its initial purchases of shares as collateral to borrow money, probably from the government, and buy more shares. That could give it the leverage to have a bigger effect on the market.
“If it’s only 120 billion renminbi, to be honest it’s too small, but if you can add leverage on top of it, that could support the large-cap, blue-chip stocks,” said Hao Hong, the chief strategist of the Bank of Communications International, the global finance unit of China’s fifth-largest bank.
The announcement came as the government has been scrambling to halt the steepest plunge in the Shanghai stock market in nearly a quarter century. Share prices have fallen nearly a third since June 12, erasing more than $2 trillion of value and inflicting immediate hardship on millions of families who not only invested their savings but also borrowed heavily at steep interest rates to buy more shares.
The design of the brokerage industry’s fund bore some similarities to the Hong Kong Exchange Fund, a government-run fund that played a crucial role in reversing the fall of the Hong Kong stock market in 1998, during the Asian financial crisis. The fund had previously invested the Hong Kong government’s fiscal reserves cautiously in deposits at low interest rates. But when it began buying stocks heavily, it set off a stock market turnaround and produced a large profit for the government.
A statement by the Securities Association of China on Saturday to its members juxtaposed an odd mix of capitalist and Maoist rhetoric in urging them to take collective action to help the stock market. “Excessively rapid rises and falls in the stock market are not conducive to the stable and healthy development of the market,” the statement said, “and as major players in this market, securities companies must take the initiative to shoulder responsibility, to unify as one, merge our wills and safeguard market stability with all our strength.”
The Securities Association also called on its members to buy back some of their own shares, supporting prices. China’s largest oil companies and big banks, in which the government holds controlling stakes, are widely believed to have used some of their money in the past week to buy back shares, and their shares have fared much better than those of smaller companies.
But the design of the securities industry’s fund, with an emphasis on blue chip stocks, could end up protecting wealthy Chinese and foreign investors much more than the young workers and families all over China who have been borrowing heavily in recent months to buy stocks that seemed to be soaring skyward, Hong Kong financiers said. Shares in large companies represent only about 30 percent of the overall value of the Shanghai stock market.
As Chinese stocks soared in the 12 months until their peak on June 12, it was the small- and medium-size companies with weak financial fundamentals that fared the best. Many of them quadrupled, or more, in value, while the overall index only doubled because large-cap stocks lagged far behind.
The small-cap and medium-cap stocks overwhelmingly tended to draw middle-class and working-class investors who were buying whatever stocks were rising fastest. The Shanghai market soared 149 percent in the year until June 12. By comparison, a stock price index of 100 large mainland Chinese companies that are traded in Hong Kong — and many of them in Shanghai as well — rose only 24 percent over the same period.
Hong Kong sets tougher listing rules than Shanghai to reduce fraud, and also keeps closer controls on trading with borrowed money. Official statistics suggest that loans to investors for stock purchases climbed ninefold in mainland China over the past two years, and were supplemented by widespread lending by informal financial companies at annual interest rates exceeding 20 percent.
The bailout funds could also end up helping big state-owned enterprises at the expense of smaller businesses, which tend to be in the private sector. President Xi Jinping and Prime Minister Li Keqiang have spoken of their desire to increase the role of the private sector as a way to improve the efficiency of the Chinese economy.
Other officials have even hinted at selling more shares in state-controlled enterprises on stock markets — the reverse of what now seems to be happening, as state-controlled companies use part of their cash reserves to buy back shares from the public.
Hours after the securities industry’s statement, the government-backed Asset Management Association of China gathered representatives from 25 mutual fund companies, who announced plans to help shore up the stock market by speeding up the issuance of funds investing in equities. But the association did not introduce its own market stabilization fund like the brokerage industry, contrary to initial reports on Chinese social media that it would do so.
Another worry lies in whether many Chinese mutual funds and other investment funds may be required to liquidate suddenly. Many of these funds have rules on losses in the underlying contracts that formed them: If the value of the fund falls 30 percent, the fund must return the remaining money to shareholders, typically by cashing in all of its shares.
With the Shanghai stock market down 28.6 percent since June 12, that rule is starting to appear to be a possible risk to the broader market, Mr. Hong said.
The 21 brokerages said that they would not resume selling shares from their own portfolios until the Shanghai stock index returns to 4,500; it closed on Friday at 3,686.915.
But Tao Zhigang, an economist who is the director of the Institute for China and Global Development at Hong Kong University, said that setting a specific target like 4,500 ran the risk that many investors may conclude the government will do whatever is necessary to push the market to that level.
That may prompt investors to borrow even more money on the conviction of a guaranteed return, he said."
frame of article is: other
###
article: "On Sunday night, President Trump got his wish for a significantly revised North American trade deal. After more than a year of intense negotiations, the United States, Canada and Mexico reached an agreement to update the North American Free Trade Agreement, the 1994 pact that governs more than $1.2 trillion worth of trade among the three nations.
The new deal won’t go into effect right away. Most of the key provisions don’t start until 2020 because leaders from the three countries have to sign it and then Congress and the legislatures in Canada and Mexico have to approve it, a process that is expected to take months.
Here’s a rundown of what’s in the “new NAFTA.”
New name. Goodbye NAFTA. The new deal will be known as the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement, or USMCA. Trump, who had long disdained NAFTA, had suggested that he might call it the “USMC,” in honor of the U.S. Marine Corps, but in the end, USMCA won out.
Big changes for cars. The goal of the new deal is to have more cars and truck parts made in North America. Starting in 2020, to qualify for zero tariffs, a car or truck must have 75 percent of its components manufactured in Canada, Mexico or the United States, a substantial boost from the current 62.5 percent requirement.
[Winners and losers of Trump's new trade deal with Canada and Mexico]
There’s also a new rule that a significant percentage of the work done on the car must be completed by workers earning at least $16 an hour, or about three times what the typical Mexican autoworker makes. Starting in 2020, cars and trucks should have at least 30 percent of the work on the vehicle done by workers earning $16 an hour. That gradually moves up to 40 percent for cars by 2023.
While many economists think these new rules will help some North American workers, they also warn that car prices might rise and some small cars may no longer be made in North America because they would be too expensive under the new requirements. There are also concerns that automakers might not make as many cars in North America to export to China and elsewhere overseas because costs would be higher in the USMCA region than making the vehicles in Asia.
Trump’s victory: Canada opens up its milk market to U.S. farmers. Trump tweeted often about how unfair he thought it was that Canada charged such high tariffs on U.S. dairy products. Canada has a complex milk and dairy system. To ensure Canadian dairy farmers don’t go bankrupt, the Canadian government restricts how much dairy can be produced in the country and how much foreign dairy can enter to keep milk prices high. Trump didn’t like that, and dairy was a major sticking point in the negotiations.
In the end, Canada is keeping most of its complex system in place, but it is giving greater market share to U.S. dairy farmers. U.S. negotiators say they got a major victory by forcing Canada to eliminate the pricing scheme for what are known as Class 7 dairy products. That means U.S. dairy farmers can probably send a lot more milk protein concentrate, skim milk powder and infant formula to Canada (and those products are relatively easy to transport and store).
Canada’s victory: Chapter 19, allowing for a special dispute process, stays intact. Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said repeatedly that he wanted to keep Chapter 19 in place, and that’s exactly what happened. The U.S. side pushed hard to eliminate this chapter, but in the end, it stayed.
Chapter 19 allows Canada, Mexico and the United States to challenge one another’s anti-dumping and countervailing duties in front of a panel of representatives from each country. This is generally a much easier process than trying to challenge a trade practice in a U.S. court. Over the years, Canada has successfully used Chapter 19 to challenge the United States on its softwood lumber restrictions.
Mexico and Canada get assurance Trump won’t pound them with auto tariffs. Trump has repeatedly threatened to slap hefty tariffs on car and vehicle parts coming from overseas into the United States. Along with the new trade deal, his administration signed “side letters” allowing the two nations to mostly dodge Trump’s auto tariffs.
The side letters say Canada and Mexico can continue sending about the same vehicles and parts across the border free of charge, regardless of whether auto tariffs go into effect down the road. Only parts above that quota could face tariffs.
Trump’s steel tariffs stay in place (for now). Canada wanted Trump to stop his 25 percent tariffs on Canadian steel. That didn’t happen — yet. The two countries are still discussing lifting those tariffs, but a senior White House official said Sunday that process is on a “completely separate track.” Trudeau has called the steel tariffs “insulting and unacceptable” because the two nations are such close allies.
Improved labor and environmental rights. The USMCA makes a number of significant upgrades to environmental and labor regulations, especially regarding Mexico. For example, the USMCA stipulates that Mexican trucks that cross the border into the United States must meet higher safety regulations and that Mexican workers must have more ability to organize and form unions. Some of these provisions might be difficult to enforce, but the Trump administration says it is committed to ensuring these happen — a reason U.S. labor unions and some Democrats are cheering the new rules.
Increased intellectual property protections. The new IP chapter is 63 pages and contains more-stringent protections for patents and trademarks, including for biotech, financial services and even domain names. Many business leaders and legal experts believed these updates were necessary given that the original agreement was negotiated 25 years ago.
Big drug companies gain more footing in Canada. U.S. drug companies will now be able to sell pharmaceuticals in Canada for 10 years before facing generic competition. That’s up from eight years of so-called “market protection” now.
Deal must be reviewed after 6 years. The USMCA stipulates that the three nations will review the agreement after six years. If all parties agree it’s still good, then the deal will continue for the full 16 year period (with the ability to renew after that for another 16 years). This was a compromise provision: Trump wanted ability to renegotiate the deal frequently. Ultimately, there will be a review, but it won’t happen until after Trump leaves office.
Chapter 11, giving investors a special way to fight government decisions, is (mostly) gone. Chapter 11 is eliminated entirely for Canada and mostly for Mexico, except for some key industries such as energy and telecommunications. Chapter 11 gave companies and investors a special process to resolve disputes with one of the governments in NAFTA. The idea was that if investors put a lot of money into a project and then the government changed the rules, there was a clear dispute process — outside the court system — where investors could get their problem resolved.
Critics argue that Chapter 11 was mainly used as a way for big corporations to get taxpayer money, but businesses say it was necessary to ensure they weren’t harmed by sudden changes when new governments came into power in Mexico, Canada or the United States. In the end, Chapter 11 is mostly gone, except for a few key industries, such as oil, that lobbied hard to be able to challenge the Mexican government if it changes the rules and tries to nationalize its energy sector again.
Related:
Under Trump, the jobs boom has finally reached blue-collar workers. Will it last?
Canada agrees to join trade accord with U.S. and Mexico, sending new NAFTA deal to Congress
U.S. and China clobber each other with biggest sets of tariffs yet"
frame of article is: government
###
article: "WASHINGTON — President Trump, who has called the North American Free Trade Agreement “the worst trade deal” ever signed by the United States, appears to have softened one of the hard-line positions that animated his presidential campaign.
He is set to propose keeping major planks of Nafta in place, according to a draft letter to Congress that lays out goals for renegotiating the trade pact with Canada and Mexico.
But his administration is seeking to add more protections for American products and industries. A proposed provision would allow tariffs to be reinstated if a flood of imports threatened to harm a domestic industry. Mr. Trump also wants to adjust the agreement’s rules of origin, or how much of a product must be made in a Nafta country. And he wants Nafta partners to expand the market for United States-made goods in their government procurement.
“In terms of what we consider to be President Trump’s economic nationalist objectives and what he has said previously about Nafta, the list of negotiating terms was relatively benign,” said Scott S. Lincicome, an international trade lawyer at White & Case.Continue reading the main story
Mr. Trump has often said that the United States could abandon Nafta altogether if renegotiating it is not possible. He has signaled that he wants to move swiftly to reorder the nation’s trade policies, and Wilbur L. Ross, the commerce secretary, said during his Senate confirmation hearing that addressing Nafta would be among his first priorities.
But the hawkish rhetoric of the campaign has given way to more measured statements on trade from the administration that track more closely with the stance of many congressional Republicans, who are avid promoters of free trade and deeply skeptical of policies they view as restrictive or protectionist.
Peter Navarro, head of the White House National Trade Council, said this month that Mexico, Canada and the United States should unite to become a regional manufacturing “powerhouse,” where workers in all three countries benefit.
The tone of the eight-page draft letter, which was reported by The Wall Street Journal, did not echo Mr. Trump’s campaign speeches. Nowhere was there a mention of Mr. Trump’s threats to pull out of the agreement. But the letter, signed by Stephen Vaughn, the acting United States trade representative, did say, “The persistent U.S. deficit in goods trade with Canada and Mexico demands that this administration take swift action to revise the relationship to reflect and respond to 21st century challenges.”
Antonio Ortiz-Mena, a former Mexican trade official, said the letter suggested a softening in tone but also contained several proposals that were likely to prompt a strong response from the Mexican government.
“There are some specific problems,” said Mr. Ortiz-Mena, now a senior adviser at Albright Stonebridge Group in Washington. “But in terms of the language used during the campaign and at the beginning of the administration, it’s not as far-reaching as some people could have expected.”
The assessment that the actual policies of the United States might not end up being as harsh as those espoused by Mr. Trump during the campaign is reflected in the confidence in the Mexican peso. Since the inauguration, measured against a basket of currencies, it has gained about 17.5 percent in value, more than any other major currency in the world. On Thursday, it traded at 18.72 pesos to the dollar, approaching the levels it held before Mr. Trump’s victory.
The Canadian government declined on Thursday to comment directly on the draft proposals, since Nafta negotiations have not begun. “Should notice of intent to renegotiate be given, Canada is prepared to discuss improvements at the appropriate time,” said Global Affairs Canada, the country’s foreign ministry.
Among Canadian trade experts, the proposals were met with relief, but the suspense has not ended. While the draft does not amount to a total dismissal of Nafta, it outlines American priorities that could threaten Canadian industries. “It’s not ripping Nafta, but there are a bunch of sticks of dynamite contained in those pages,” said Mark Warner, a Canadian-American trade lawyer based in Toronto. “It’s going to be a messy, hard-slogging negotiation.”
The letter calls for expanding market access among the three countries and eliminating licensing and permit barriers that tend to stall commerce. It also calls for maintaining “reciprocal access” for textile and apparel products.
Rather than scrap Nafta’s arbitration tribunals, regarded by some free-trade critics as secretive bodies that give private corporations unbridled power to challenge foreign governments outside the court system, the letter proposes to “maintain and seek to improve procedures” for settling disputes.
The draft also makes no mention of currency policy, an issue that many trade experts thought might be on the table.
The administration does give itself room to get tougher. The proposal for reinstating tariffs, often referred to as a snapback, is billed as a “safeguard mechanism” to protect domestic industries. The draft also suggests seeking to “level the playing field” on tax treatment. Such measures could bring objections from Canada and Mexico.
Mr. Trump’s economic advisers have argued that Mexico uses its value-added tax as a tariff that puts the United States at a disadvantage. The president has called for a tax on companies that move their operations to Mexico and try to sell products in the United States. Republicans in Congress are considering a “border adjustment tax” that would make imports more expensive.
American business welcomed the additional specifics on trade policy in the letter. “The details in the letter have whet our appetite for more,” said John Murphy, senior vice president for international policy at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
Automakers and car dealers have expressed concerns that any changes to Nafta could disrupt the strong vehicle market in the United States. General Motors, Ford and Fiat Chrysler operate plants in Mexico that supply models popular with American consumers, such as pickup trucks. Their assembly plants in the United States also rely on a steady flow of parts made by Mexican suppliers.
The industry, including dealers, is particularly worried that Mr. Trump might follow through on the border tax on vehicles imported from Mexico.
Mr. Ross, the commerce secretary, said in an interview on CNBC on Thursday that changing the rules of origin would actually benefit car companies. “The many problems with the rules of origins in Nafta as presently drafted is that in the case of, say, autos, it went specifically part by part,” he said. “Nafta’s an old agreement, and many of those parts are no longer even used in cars because automotive technology has moved on.”
Mr. Trump has been adamantly opposed to multilateral trade deals, arguing that he can negotiate better agreements bilaterally. It remains unclear from the draft proposal, however, whether the administration’s ideas for rewriting Nafta would have an impact on trade deficits. It does not put forth any sort of target or range for the size of the trade deficit the United States would be willing to tolerate. And nowhere is there a mention of Mr. Trump’s threats to pull out of the agreement.
Withdrawing from Nafta unilaterally could be more complicated that Mr. Trump realized as a candidate. The draft proposal seems to recognize that opening negotiations among the three countries will be a delicate challenge.
Mr. Trump would need to give Congress 90 days’ notice before he could begin negotiations, meaning they could not start until midsummer at the earliest.
“There is much to like about it. There are areas where we are going to make suggestions,” said Representative Kevin Brady, Republican of Texas and chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee.Continue reading the main story"
frame of article is: government
###
article: "OTTAWA/WASHINGTON (Reuters) ― The United States and Canada forged a last-gasp deal on Sunday to salvage NAFTA as a trilateral pact with Mexico, rescuing a three-country, $1.2 trillion open-trade zone that had been about to collapse after nearly a quarter century.

In a big victory for his agenda to shake-up an era of global free trade that many associate with the signing of NAFTA in 1994, President Donald Trump coerced Canada and Mexico to accept more restrictive commerce with their main export partner.

Trump’s primary objective in reworking NAFTA was to bring down U.S. trade deficits, a goal he has also pursued with China, by imposing hundreds of billions of dollars in tariffs on imported goods from the Asian giant.

While the new United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA) avoids tariffs, it will make it harder for global auto makers to build cars cheaply in Mexico and is aimed at bringing more jobs into the United States.

Since talks began more than a year ago, it was clear Canada and Mexico would have to make concessions in the face of Trump’s threats to tear up NAFTA and relief was palpable in both countries on Sunday that the deal was largely intact and had not fractured supply chains between weaker bilateral agreements.

“It’s a good day for Canada,” Prime Minister Justin Trudeau told reporters after a late-night cabinet meeting to discuss the deal, which triggered a jump in global financial markets.

U.S. President Donald Trump shakes hands with Canada’s Prime Minister Justin Trudeau in a bilateral meeting at the G7 Summit in in Charlevoix, Quebec, Canada, June 8, 2018

Leah Millis / Reuters

In a joint statement, Canada and the United States said it would “result in freer markets, fairer trade and robust economic growth in our region.”

Negotiators worked frantically ahead of a midnight ET (0400 GMT) U.S.-imposed deadline to settle differences, with both sides making concessions to seal the deal. The United States and Mexico had already clinched a bilateral agreement in August.

“It’s a great win for the president and a validation for his strategy in the area of international trade,” a senior administration official told reporters.

Trump has approved the deal with Canada, a source familiar with the decision said. U.S. officials intend to sign the agreement with Canada and Mexico at the end of November, after which it would be submitted to the U.S. Congress for approval, a senior U.S. official said.

Cost For Canada

The deal will preserve a trade dispute settlement mechanism that Canada fought hard to maintain to protect its lumber industry and other sectors from U.S. anti-dumping tariffs, U.S. and Canadian officials said.

But it came at a cost.

Canada has agreed to provide U.S. dairy farmers access to about 3.5 percent of its approximately $16 billion annual domestic dairy market. Although Canadian sources said its government was prepared to offer compensation, dairy farmers reacted angrily.

“We fail to see how this deal can be good for the 220,000 Canadian families that depend on dairy for their livelihood.” Pierre Lampron, president of Dairy Farmers of Canada, said in a statement.

“This has happened, despite assurances that our government would not sign a bad deal for Canadians.”

The deal also requires a higher proportion of the parts in a car to be made in areas of North America paying at least $16 an hour, a rule aimed at shifting jobs from Mexico.

Canada and Mexico each agreed to a quota of 2.6 million passenger vehicles exported to the United States in the event that Trump imposes 25 percent global autos tariffs on national security grounds.

The quota would allow for significant growth in tariff-free automotive exports from Canada above current production levels of about 2 million units, safeguarding Canadian plants. It is also well above the 1.8 million cars and SUVs Mexico sent north last year.

But the deal failed to resolve U.S. tariffs on Canada’s steel and aluminum exports.

The Trump administration had threatened to proceed with a Mexico-only trade pact as U.S. talks with Canada foundered.

“It’s a good night for Mexico, and for North America,” Mexican Foreign Secretary Luis Videgaray said.

The news delighted financial markets that had fretted for months about the potential economic damage if NAFTA blew up.

U.S. stock index futures rose, with S&P 500 Index e-mini futures up more than 0.5 percent, suggesting the benchmark index would open near a record on Monday.

The Canadian dollar surged to its highest since May against the U.S. dollar, gaining around 0.5 percent. The Mexican peso gained 0.8 percent to its highest against the greenback since early August.[MKTS/GLOB]

“Though markets were already anticipating an agreement, one source of worry will be swept away if a deal is made,” Yukio Ishizuki, senior currency strategist at Daiwa Securities in Tokyo, said.

“That will lead to a rise in trust in the U.S. economy, so it’s easy for risk sentiment to improve.”

Trump on Monday praised Canada’s entry into the reworked trade deal.

In a post on Twitter, Trump called the U.S. agreement with its neighbor to the north “wonderful” and “a great deal for all three countries,” adding that the new trade alliance would be renamed the United States Mexico Canada Agreement, or USMCA.

Late last night, our deadline, we reached a wonderful new Trade Deal with Canada, to be added into the deal already reached with Mexico. The new name will be The United States Mexico Canada Agreement, or USMCA. It is a great deal for all three countries, solves the many......

Late last night, our deadline, we reached a wonderful new Trade Deal with Canada, to be added into the deal already reached with Mexico. The new name will be The United States Mexico Canada Agreement, or USMCA. It is a great deal for all three countries, solves the many......— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump)October 1, 2018

October 1, 2018

....deficiencies and mistakes in NAFTA, greatly opens markets to our Farmers and Manufacturers, reduces Trade Barriers to the U.S. and will bring all three Great Nations together in competition with the rest of the world. The USMCA is a historic transaction!

....deficiencies and mistakes in NAFTA, greatly opens markets to our Farmers and Manufacturers, reduces Trade Barriers to the U.S. and will bring all three Great Nations together in competition with the rest of the world. The USMCA is a historic transaction!— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump)October 1, 2018

October 1, 2018

Congratulations to Mexico and Canada!

Congratulations to Mexico and Canada!— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump)October 1, 2018

October 1, 2018

(Reporting by David Ljunggren in Ottawa and Roberta Rampton in Washington; Additional reporting by David Shepardson and David Lawder in Washington and Diego Oré, Ana Isabel Martinez and Anthony Esposito in Mexico City; ; Editing by Lisa Shumaker, Peter Cooney & Kim Coghill)"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "After months of painstaking haggling, the U.S. Senate voted Tuesday to approve a historic $1.2 trillion bill designed to upgrade the nation’s aging infrastructure system by repairing and constructing new roads, bridges, airports, waterways and more.
If approved by the House, the legislation would provide the largest federal investment in infrastructure in decades. It would also mark a major victory for President Joe Biden, an avid railway fan who pledged to restore bipartisanship upon taking office.
The vote was bipartisan, with 19 Republican senators joining every Democrat in favor.
The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act includes more than $175 billion for building and repairing roads, bridges and railroads; $39 billion for public transportation and $65 billion for expanding access to high-speed internet. It includes tens of billions more to improve electric and power grids and make school buses and ferries more environmentally friendly.
The legislation also includes $15 billion aimed at replacing the nation’s lead pipes and service lines, a big part of Biden’s pledge to aid overlooked and marginalized communities.
The financing of the package, which includes $550 billion in new spending, presented the biggest obstacle for the bipartisan group of senators ― 10 Republicans and 10 Democrats ― who spent months working to draft it. They ultimately settled on a mix of various revenue sources — including obscure budget maneuvers, fees, and asset sales — without raising taxes to cover the cost of the new spending.
The Congressional Budget Office, a nonpartisan scorekeeper, said that roughly half of the bill would be paid for, with $256 billion added to the deficit over the next 10 years. That analysis fueled GOP opposition to the measure, especially among self-described deficit hawks.
But the bill’s authors countered that CBO’s analysis neglected other savings included in the bill, such as roughly $200 billion previously allocated to address the COVID-19 pandemic and unspent unemployment insurance funds. The provisions, Sen. Mitt Romney (R-Utah) argued, “don’t score under [CBO’s] rules, but they are real dollars.”
The path ahead for the bill is unclear, however.
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) has vowed not to allow a vote on the bipartisan legislation without the Senate first approving a $3.5 trillion reconciliation bill — a partisan proposal to address the many policies (like child care, paid leave and climate provisions) that Republicans refuse to engage on.
Democrats on Monday unveiled their outline for the bill, a list of instructions for relevant Senate committees tasked with writing its various components. It includes huge liberal priorities such as paid leave, monthly checks for parents, immigration reform and new Medicare benefits.
“A budget should be a statement of our values, and this budget is a clear declaration of the value that congressional Democrats place on America’s workers and families,” Pelosi said in a statement, praising the “transformational” document.
The reconciliation process allows Democrats to avoid a GOP filibuster, but it requires every member of the Democratic caucus to vote for the package, even those who have concerns with the $3.5 trillion price tag like Sen. Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona and Joe Manchin of West Virginia.
House progressives, meanwhile, are flexing their muscles by threatening to vote against the bipartisan infrastructure bill if their Senate counterparts decrease the size of the reconciliation package. A protracted standoff between the party’s two ideological wings could derail both bills and blow up Biden’s legislative agenda, which got a huge boost this week.
The more immediate challenge for Democrats this week, however, is staying united in response to numerous amendments Republicans are expected to offer to the Democratic budget resolution ― amendments that are often messaging bills designed to exploit divisions within the party on taxes, spending, immigration and other issues ahead of next year’s midterm elections. The so-called “vote-a-rama,” a grueling marathon of votes, could last many hours and potentially even days."
frame of article is: government
###
article: "CLAIRTON, Pa. — When President Trump imposed tariffs on steel imports in June, Richard Lattanzi thought of dozens of his fellow steelworkers who have for years put off badly needed repairs of their cars and homes.
“There was a lot of excitement here; there were a lot of us saying, ‘It’s about time someone is looking out for us,’ ” said Lattanzi, the mayor of this town of 7,000 and a safety inspector at the U.S. Steel plant in nearby West Mifflin. “A lot of people around here were saying, ‘We’re going to be okay.’ ”
Four months later, Lattanzi is less optimistic. Production at U.S. Steel’s facilities have ramped up, and the company announced this summer that, thanks in part to the tariffs, its profits will surge. But in interviews in recent weeks, Lattanzi and other steelworkers said they’re no longer confident they’ll take part in the tariff bounty.
“It’s been a little like watching the air going out of a balloon,” Lattanzi said.
As he has pressed his steel tariffs, Trump has declared that the industry is “being rebuilt overnight.” But the question facing the rank and file is whether the controversial policy — which has raised the price of inputs for many American companies and alienated allies — will translate into higher wages and better benefits.
While the impact of recent pacts — such as an agreement struck with Canada and Mexico last week to modernize the North American Free Trade Agreement — may take years to be fully understood, the steel industry provides a more immediate testing ground.
The initial anticipation of the tariffs, followed by their actual imposition, led the price of the metal to soar. Now, facing less foreign competition, domestic steel companies’ profits are ballooning. And, crediting Trump, the companies are making plans to open up new steel plants and hire more workers.
“The commitment that he has to steel is unprecedented,” U.S. Steel chief executive David Burritt said in August, after Trump visited a U.S. Steel plant reopening in Granite City, Ill. “He’s with us and we’re going to do everything we can to support him because this is not just good for U.S. Steel. This is great for the United States of America.”
Yet the trickle-down effects are far harder to predict. Steel companies, while supportive of the tariffs, have experienced wild gyrations in their business in recent years and can’t be certain the lucrative new protections will stick around. So even in this time of sudden prosperity, some analysts say, they must be disciplined with worker pay and benefits.
Here in southwest Pennsylvania, 15 miles from Pittsburgh, the question is coming to a head because labor contracts governing 31,000 steelworkers at U.S. Steel and ArcelorMittal, the largest steel company in the world, expired last month. Workers say the new contracts represent the perfect opportunity for the companies to be more generous with their workers — who had given up raises just a few years ago when times were tough.
Frustrated by the lack of progress in negotiations, about 31,000 steelworkers at the companies voted last month to authorize a strike. Though there were signs Wednesday that they could reach an agreement, if the negotiations break down, it could bring about the industry’s first major work stoppage in four decades.
The steel industry was already in a period of renewal when Trump slapped 25 percent tariffs on steel imports. Trump acted in the name of national security, though he later justified the move as a way to help the steel industry rebuild.
The industry was enjoying gains driven by a strong economy, high demand to fix bridges and infrastructure after several major natural disasters, and an effort by President Barack Obama to limit steel imports from China.
The tariffs sent the price of steel surging more than 33 percent.
“We have a strong U.S. exposure; clearly we are a net beneficiary of the trade actions,” Aditya Mittal, chief financial officer of ArcelorMittal, said in August, according to Bloomberg News. “It’s great to see the two things come together, the improvements we have made as a company as well as the improvements in the market.”
Trump has repeatedly cited the gains as one of the biggest upsides of his trade policy. After he visited the Granite City plant, video circulated of a steelworker being brought to tears by news of the plant’s expansion.
“Trump has supercharged [the sector] with broad-based tariffs,” said Phil Gibbs, a steel industry analyst at KeyBanc Capital Markets.
But while the tariff boon might provide new opportunities for jobs and boost corporate bottom lines, whether it can overcome longer-term factors affecting the livelihoods of steelworkers remains to be seen.
“Any reasonable observer who just goes on the economic facts will say: ‘This will not last forever,’ ” said Steven Kyle, an economics professor at Cornell University. “The tariff will temporarily make them more profitable. But we all know it could end at any time.”
Those longer-term trends help explain why, even during one of the best periods for the steel industry in recent memory, the negotiations between organized labor and steel companies here grew tense.
In its latest offer, U.S. Steel said it would give workers an immediate raise of 4 percent, followed by 3 percent annual raises later on. By the usual standards, that would be a good deal.
But at the same time, the company said it is wrestling with soaring health-care costs in the long run. The company said its health-care costs are projected to rise to $20,000 per employee by 2019 and that it needs to start asking workers to absorb some of those — namely by paying $145 per month for health care. Workers haven’t paid premiums in the past.
The proposal represents “an incredible value under the Company’s current proposal,” said Meghan Cox, a company spokeswoman.
But to the union, it was an upsetting plan. It would reduce the overall wage increase to just about 1.7 percent over nine years.
“We have done so much for this company, and now they have the audacity to bring before us all these concessions when they are projected to profit $2 billion this year alone,” said Michael P. Young, a maintenance technician at a U.S. Steel plant in Portage, Ind., and a survivor of colon cancer. “I want the company to leave my health care alone.”
Young and others were particularly furious because the work they do can be perilous to their health. Young ticked through the toxic substances he is exposed to while manning the production line, such as hydrochloric, sulfuric and chromic acids, as well as tin, zinc and kinds of chromium used to plate metal objects.
“The bargain has always been that we work in very dirty, very dangerous, very unhealthy places, and in exchange we get good, quality health insurance at affordable prices,” said Cliff Tobey, who helps mine for iron ore at U.S. Steel’s facility in Hibbing, Minn.
It’s not clear how much leverage the workers will have. While at least temporarily protected from foreign competition, U.S. Steel is facing increased domestic competition from steel shops without unions.
The percentage of steelworkers who are in a union fell from 36 percent in 2000 to 24 percent in 2017, according to the left-leaning Economic Policy Institute. Union steel jobs pay more than 10 percent more than nonunion jobs, according to the institute.
Gibbs, of KeyBanc Capital Markets, says U.S. Steel also needs to invest in upgrading its plants and facilities — new types of technologies that require fewer workers.
But many workers don’t see why they shouldn’t share more in an economic upswing. In 2015, when prices were sloping steadily downward, U.S. Steel executives declared “extreme economic times” and urged the union to freeze worker pay. Members agreed.
Jim Borkowski, a father of two, frequently works 16-hour “double shifts” in very high temperatures at the U.S. Steel plant in Clairton, overseeing oven batteries that screech and wheeze so loudly he wears both earplugs and earmuffs.
Ownership “got a huge tax cut, and the tariffs are lining their pockets,” said Borkowski, 33, still gleaming with sweat in his orange flame-retardant pants. “We are ready to get our fair share.”
The coming months could provide a strong indication of whether workers like Borkowski will be satisfied. The steelworkers union said Wednesday that they had seen “significant progress” in negotiations with U.S. Steel.
“We’re still negotiating for a fair contract,” said Lattanzi, the Clairton mayor and steelworker."
frame of article is: industry
###
article: "President Trump’s announcement that he planned to impose steep tariffs on imported steel and aluminum delighted some blue-collar industries he had championed. “Enthusiastic and gratified are probably understatements,” said Michael A. Bless, the president of Century Aluminum.
Behemoth steel buyers like Boeing and General Motors weren’t as pleased. Their shares fell on the news, and the most obvious aluminum dependents — the brewing giants Anheuser-Busch and MillerCoors — warned about the risk of job losses.
But it is people like H. O. Woltz III who feel most vulnerable.
Mr. Woltz is the chairman and chief executive of Insteel Industries, which operates 10 plants from Arizona to Pennsylvania producing steel wire products for concrete reinforcing. He has about 1,000 workers, most without college degrees.
“The jobs that we have are good jobs,” Mr. Woltz said. “Our guys make a lot of money.”
Now his business calculus is being upended. A tariff on imports also allows domestic steel and aluminum producers to charge higher prices, affecting manufacturers across the United States.
As industrial America sorts out the tariffs’ prospective impact, one thing is clear: The divide between the metal producers and their customers slices directly through Mr. Trump’s blue-collar constituency.Continue reading the main story
Mr. Trump argues that free trade has hollowed out America’s industrial base and saddled the country with huge trade deficits. He has promised to recover lost ground with an “America first” trade policy.Continue reading the main story
But putting America first may not put all American workers ahead.
“There are more losers than winners,” said Monica de Bolle, an economist at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. “If the point is to protect American jobs, if the point is to protect small and medium-sized businesses, this is exactly the wrong way to do things.”
The mills and smelters that supply the raw material, and that would directly benefit from the tariffs, have been shrinking for years. Today, those industries employ fewer than 200,000 people. The companies that buy steel and aluminum, to make everything from trucks to chicken coops, employ more than 6.5 million workers, according to a Heritage Foundation analysis of Commerce Department data.
Mr. Woltz, who is based in North Carolina, counts himself among hundreds of specialized businesses that will bear the brunt of the tariffs.
He pays around $20 an hour on average, and he has been able to increase his payroll despite stiff competition from abroad. If you have seen a bridge being hoisted over a highway in the last 20 years, he said, you probably caught a glimpse of Insteel’s handiwork.
The wire product he makes is not unique, though, and he fears that if he has to charge commercial builders more, he will lose business to foreign competitors paying much less for their raw materials.
“If the customers have the option of purchasing from Malaysians or Colombians, who don’t have to pay that extra cost, that’s what they are going to do,” Mr. Woltz said.
He buys most of his raw material from domestic mills, but he expects them to raise prices as their foreign competitors are hit by tariffs of up to 25 percent.Continue reading the main story
Right now, he pays around $600 per ton of steel wire rod. The impact of a 25 percent tariff would add $150 to that price. He makes only $40 in profit per ton, though, so the math would destroy his balance sheet.
It is not clear yet whether employers like Mr. Woltz will cut jobs because of the tariffs. Economic growth has been strong, and the corporate tax cut will give companies more cash to work with.
“We think the dial won’t move that much,” said Atsi Sheth, an economist at Moody’s Investors Service. “You are likely to gain jobs in a few sectors, but lose them in others.”
President George W. Bush imposed tariffs of up to 30 percent on steel imports in 2002, intending them to last three years, but lifted them earlier than expected after European trading partners threatened to retaliate. One retrospective study found that higher steel prices cost more jobs than the number of people employed in the industry at the time.
In the long haul, tariffs may also hurt the industries they’re supposed to prop up, Ms. Sheth said.
“Even the sectors that are protected over time become less efficient because they have to work less hard,” she said.
But for now, the mood at Century Aluminum is jubilant.
“Finally we have got an administration who is willing to say, ‘It might make a lot of people around the world mad, but if we don’t do it now, then when?’” said Mr. Bless, Century’s president.Continue reading the main story
The tariff on aluminum, prospectively 10 percent, would allow Mr. Bless to restart some production of high-purity aluminum for military use at Century’s plant in Hawesville, Ky., which it partly shut three years ago, he said. He plans to hire 300 people this year on top of the 1,850 he already employs and invest more than $100 million in the smelting operation.
“These are jobs that are sorely needed,” Mr. Bless said.
That is the kind of response that labor unions have been waiting for. Leo W. Gerard, the president of the United Steelworkers union, which also represents aluminum workers, said his members were tired of enduring layoffs because of an onslaught of artificially cheap steel and aluminum produced by “cheaters” in China.
“Some of these idiots that say we are going to start a trade war — well, we are in a trade war now, and we are just sitting back,” Mr. Gerard said. His union represents more than 200,000 Canadian workers, though, and Mr. Gerard said he hoped Mr. Trump would not apply the tariff to Canada.
“We didn’t want to — and didn’t ask the administration to — alienate those countries that don’t cheat,” Mr. Gerard said, citing Canada and European countries among the virtuous.
Economists say it is unlikely that the tariffs would lead to a steel hiring boom. The industry has hemorrhaged jobs over the last half-century, but research suggests that is largely because of technological innovation.
In any case, economists say, any gains would probably be offset by the pain inflicted on smaller players down the supply chain. John T. Johnson’s company is one of them.
Mr. Johnson runs a family business out of Nashville, Mid-South Wire Company, which his father founded 51 years ago.Continue reading the main story
He has 150 employees, who all get a 401(k) retirement plan and health insurance. They tend to spend their careers at the company, turning hot-rolled wire rod into dishwasher racks, shopping carts and bucket handles.
Mr. Johnson used to make a lot of barbecue grills, he said. Then Chinese manufacturers got into the game, flooding the market with cheap alternatives. Char-Broil grill production moved from Georgia to China. Others followed. Mr. Johnson had to find new products to replace that business.
“You can hardly find an American-made barbecue grill now,” Mr. Johnson said. “They are all imported.”
The experience taught him that his hold on the market would last only as long as his price advantage, which would slip away with tariffs.
“When you have a situation like this, that creates the opportunity for these products to go offshore,” he said. If his sales are badly hurt by the tariffs, Mr. Johnson will lay people off, notwithstanding any tax-cut benefits.
“I have to make money to pay taxes,” he said glumly. To him, it feels as if the administration cares only about the people melting and hot-rolling steel, and not those turning that material into the racks at a hardware store or the products sitting on them.
“We are steel workers, too,” he said. “Our jobs and our livelihood are centered around steel just as much as the steel mills.”Continue reading the main story"
frame of article is: industry
###
article: "MOON TOWNSHIP, Pa. — In the hotly contested special election in this southwest corner of Pennsylvania, one issue has universal support: President Trump’s tariffs on steel and aluminum imports.
“A lot of steel mills are now opening up because what I did,” Trump said at a Saturday night rally here for Republican nominee Rick Saccone. “Steel is back, and aluminum is back.”
Even as Saccone and Democrat Conor Lamb have fought over health care, taxes and guns, the two agree that the Republican president’s tariffs are good for jobs and the country.
It’s time to “take some action to level the playing field here,” said Lamb, who endorsed the tariffs as soon as Trump announced them.
“This is a national security issue,” Saccone said. “Believe me, no one wants to start a trade war. This is a very narrowly focused field that the president is touching on.”
The unanimity in steel country stands in sharp contrast to how the tariffs have played in Washington and around the country. Trump’s surprise move has scrambled party loyalties, upsetting Republican leaders fearing a trade war and attracting the support of Democrats determined to win back working-class voters in the midterm elections.
In the final days of this closely watched U.S. House contest, the issue’s resonance in Pennsylvania’s 18th Congressional District underscored Trump’s populist appeal, how he reconfigured the electoral map in 2016 and has redefined the Republican Party.
And yet, there are limits to Trump’s support. Tuesday’s race is a toss-up despite Trump’s 19-point win in the district and millions of dollars of Republican-backed attack ads against Lamb. The 33-year-old Marine and former prosecutor has waged an energetic campaign against Saccone, 60, a state lawmaker.
Privately, Trump has cited the close race as a reason to move ahead on tariffs, and he rebuffed economic advisers who worry that they will kill more jobs than they create.
If Lamb wins Tuesday, it will be a major setback for both House Republicans in their bid to hold the majority this November and the president.
And no matter the outcome, the frustration of the economy’s forgotten prevails in this section of Trump country, fueling a strong anti-establishment mood among the electorate.
Jim Walton, 53, a roofer who intended to vote for Lamb, said Americans have been “getting treated unfairly for years, and it’s been sad. Even Bill Clinton — he was one of the better presidents we had in there — he signed that NAFTA deal that screwed a lot of us.”
The nation’s largest steel companies, based in this district that stretches from the Pittsburgh suburbs to the state’s rural borders with Ohio and West Virginia, have welcomed the new policy. But there is little expectation of an overnight renaissance for the steel industry, which peaked in the 1960s.
Still, the concept of punishing foreign companies for taking advantage of American steelworkers was powerful, and it crossed partisan boundaries.
Democrats and union canvassers were optimistic that the tariffs would not change the trajectory of the race. Every major union, from the United Steelworkers to the United Mine Workers of America, had endorsed Lamb, citing Saccone’s long record of antilabor votes. Workers who rejected Hillary Clinton in 2016 were willing to back Lamb, who rallied with steelworkers on Friday and would rally with miners on Sunday.
Democrats, anxious about the president, were generally pleased by the tariff. Republicans, inclined to trust Trump more than any other member of their party, were overjoyed.
David Podurgile, 52, described a buoyant new mood at his employer, Murray Energy, since the administration relaxed regulations on the coal industry, and he gave the president the benefit of the doubt on tariffs.
“There’s going to be pressure from other countries at the beginning, so maybe there’s going to be a trade war, as they call it,” he said. “But we’ve been treated so unfairly for so long.”
Twenty years ago, 21,100 Pennsylvanians were employed directly by iron and steel mills. Ten years later, that number dipped to 13,600. At the start of this year, just 10,600 Pennsylvanians worked in that industry, down slightly since Trump’s inauguration.
The state’s unemployment rate, at 4.7 percent, has returned to a level where it was before the Great Recession. Steel stopped being the region’s major industry decades ago. For every worker employed by U.S. Steel, nine work at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center; the United Steelworkers’ most recent project in the region is not organizing steelworkers but organizing graduate students at Pittsburgh’s major universities.
“The working class is undergoing a major redefinition right now,” said Beth Shaaban, a 39-year-old doctoral candidate at the University of Pittsburgh. “We’re obviously in solidarity with all workers who may be in those fields more traditionally associated with the USW.”
But the idea of taking action to punish “cheaters” in the steel market is potent — so potent that local Democrats have had nothing bad to say about it.
Sen. Robert P. Casey Jr. (D-Pa.), who faces reelection in this state that backed Trump, commended the president for taking “action to protect our steelworkers.” Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto (D), who once criticized Trump for invoking Pittsburgh as a reason to withdraw from the Paris Climate Accords, also praised the tariffs.
“There is no doubt that if we get a more level playing field, the opportunity to produce more steel is very real,” Peduto told reporters this past week.
Outside Pennsylvania, Democrats in competitive races this November, such as Sen. Sherrod Brown (Ohio), Sen. Joe Donnelly (Ind.) and Sen. Tammy Baldwin (Wis.), have offered similar praise.
Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) has given them, and the president, bipartisan cover.
“I totally agree, wholeheartedly agree with President Trump’s instinct to go after China,” Schumer told The Washington Post on Wednesday. “All of these academics [say] anytime you try to do anything on trade, it’s protectionist. They ought to not let that deter them, but they ought to put together a real plan that works.”
The tariffs have faced resistance from Republicans. House Speaker Paul D. Ryan (R-Wis.) and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) opposed the move, fearing a reciprocal response from other nations on U.S. products such as Harley-Davidson motorcycles and Kentucky bourbon.
Sen. Patrick J. Toomey (R-Pa.), who easily carried the 18th Congressional District in his 2016 reelection, called the tariff “a big mistake that will increase costs on American consumers, cost our country jobs, and invite retaliation from other countries.”
Republicans worry that the extra costs will erase the financial benefits of the tax cuts, negating a potent issue for the midterms.
Toomey’s position is shared by many conservative Republicans who won office powered by the anti-tax and anti-spending tea party movement. The Steering Committee of the Republican Study Committee, a conservative group that encompasses most of the House Republican Conference, said “tariffs on imported goods are a tax on American consumers and businesses,” even if some foreign actors were breaking the rules.
There’s little enthusiasm for that idea in Pennsylvania.
“I’ve worked on jobs where they say, we’re going to use nothing but American-made stuff, and they don’t follow through,” said Greg Firestone, 62, a heavy industry carpenter. “No offense to our friends from the north, but I’ve heard that promise and then I’ve seen the steel bars with ‘Made in Canada’ stamped on them. If he can make the steel company in this country competitive, it would be a big thing.”
Southwest Pennsylvania has seen a political tariff debate before. In 2002, the George W. Bush administration announced similar steel tariffs, a move widely seen at the time as a way to win votes in Rust Belt states that he had lost in the 2000 election.
The Trump administration looked at the 2002 example as the new tariffs were put together. The Council of Economic Advisers presented the president with an analysis finding that the 2002 tariffs led to job losses, with fewer gains in the steel industry than declines in manufacturing and other sectors.
The president considered the advice but said that he was skeptical of economists and their data. He had promised this sort of policy as a candidate for president, and it was popular with his base.
Erica Werner and Josh Dawsey contributed to this report."
frame of article is: industry
###
article: "How Trump’s Tariff Punch Hurt His Pro-Business Agenda
Markets swoon after the president who hired executives, prioritized deregulation and cut taxes takes a protectionist turn
When a key economic input suddenly becomes scarce, it’s called a supply shock: It pushes costs up and economic activity down.
This helps explain why markets have responded so badly to President Donald Trump’s announcement of a 25% tariff on steel imports and 10% on aluminum. Like a geopolitical shock that reduces the supply of oil, it’s bad for both inflation and growth.
To be sure, the direct macroeconomic effect of Mr. Trump’s tariffs look to be slim. Net imports of steel and aluminum are about 0.2% of gross domestic product, compared with 0.3% for oil. Barclays estimates the tariff will add 0.1 percentage point to inflation and subtract 0.1 to 0.2 percentage point from economic growth, for one year.
But those small direct impacts are exacerbated by what the tariffs symbolize for Mr. Trump’s agenda and the broader global economy. By following his nationalist instincts Mr. Trump has broken with the pro-business factions in his administration and his party whose policy priorities have been critical to the upswing in business and investor sentiment since he was elected. By willingly hurting U.S. allies over a problem of overcapacity that is mainly China’s doing, he’s cast further uncertainty over the U.S. role as global leader.
Market action over Thursday and Friday neatly captures these cross currents.
Shares of steel and aluminum makers went up, while shares of companies that consume them, such as automobile, aircraft and construction equipment makers went down. Because consumers are more important to the economy than producers, the overall market went down.
With investors already on edge about Federal Reserve interest rate increases, the steel tariffs at the margin compound inflation pressure. That effect is so far too small to alter the Fed’s calculus, but a tit-for-tat cycle of retaliation could lead to even more inflation and rate increases than investors or the Fed have anticipated.
Mr. Trump says the U.S. needs to produce more steel and aluminum at home to safeguard national security. If so, that comes at a price, just as Japan’s longtime insistence on growing its own rice cost the Japanese in pricier food.
Firms can produce more at lower cost by serving a global rather than just a domestic market. Protectionism shrinks markets, raises costs, and reduces how fast a country can grow without generating inflation. U.S. steel and aluminum companies can meet the demand previously filled by imports, but with unemployment at a 17-year low that may require hiring workers away from other industries, putting upward pressure on wages.
This is good news in the short run for workers, but bad news for any consumer who must now pay more for cars or beer cans. Thus on Thursday and Friday, Treasury bond yields began to discount slightly higher inflation and slightly slower growth.
Because tariffs reduce the foreign currency needed to buy imports they are supposed to lead to a stronger dollar, but in fact the dollar fell in the wake of the tariff news. Investors speculated that the angry reaction of American allies, in particular the European Union, showed U.S. global leadership is fading and with it the dollar’s appeal as a reserve currency.
“If you start a global trade war, the dollars required for global trade activity falls,” said one fund manager.
The tariffs may also lead to a broader rethink of just how beneficial Mr. Trump is to the economy. Mr. Trump campaigned as a nationalist whose anti-immigration and anti-free trade views were at odds with business and establishment Republicans. Once in office, he hired business executives and prioritized deregulation and tax cuts. That is one reason surveys of business sentiment are so buoyant relative to actual economic activity. But that pro-business side is now taking a back seat to a less business-friendly nationalist agenda, which is denting investor sentiment.
It may be premature to predict a long-term impact. The tariffs haven’t been finalized and Mr. Trump could yet soften the sting. China may move more quickly to curb its overcapacity, the root of the import surge and price pressure that is hurting U.S. producers. Yet the decision has generated conflict within his own administration, his party and with key U.S. allies that, at least at the margin, counteracts the boost from the rest of his agenda.
Write to Greg Ip at greg.ip@wsj.com
Appeared in the March 3, 2018, print edition as 'Trump’s Pro-Business Agenda Takes a Hit.'"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Profits and raises are back at one, while the other is cutting costs and delaying investments

Feb. 10, 2019 7:00 am ET

Nearly a year after the U.S. imposed tariffs on imported steel, the higher prices have been a godsend for Byer Steel Co. The family-owned Ohio company last year posted its first profit in four years and surprised workers with year-end bonuses.

The tariffs “are giving us the ability to get off our knees for a minute,” said Burke Byer, whose great-grandfather founded the Cincinnati company a century ago. “We’re not so hand-to-mouth.”

The same tariffs have pinched another small family business: Laclede Chain Manufacturing Co. The St. Louis-based maker of steel chains had been on a growth spurt before higher steel prices forced it to refocus on cost cutting.

Surcharges have helped offset higher raw-material costs but don’t “make us whole,” said Tim Riley, president of the 165-year-old company. Laclede put off plans to add a third shift at its Vicksburg, Miss., plant and delayed a $1 million investment in new equipment.

The shifting fortunes of these two businesses show how steel tariffs imposed last year have created opportunities for some and challenges for others. Both companies say that business has stabilized since the trade conflict ratcheted up last summer, but add that planning remains difficult amid uncertainties about U.S. trade policy over the long term.

“The real-world challenge all of us are asking is, what does the long-term sustainable world look like without these tariffs,” said Mr. Byer, who ran the company for 16 years. He sold the business earlier this month to his sister.

The U.S. is dispatching its chief trade negotiator, Robert Lighthizer, and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin to Beijing this week to continue talks ahead of a March 1 deadline to reach an accord. President Trump is “highly unlikely” to meet with Chinese President Xi Jinping ahead of the deadline, a White House official said Thursday.

For now, steelmakers’ profits are up, though foreign steel continues to account for a significant share of the U.S. steel market. The January average price for hot-rolled U.S.-made steel, an industry benchmark, was 17% above its October 2017 lows, though prices have fallen significantly from last year’s highs. For some U.S. manufacturers, the pain of higher steel costs has been eased by tariffs imposed in September on $200 billion of Chinese imports.

Byer Steel now has about 130 employees, including 20 hired last year. Sales totaled $45 million in 2018, a 30% increase. “We can start thinking about the future,” said Mr. Byer.

With more cash in its coffers, Byer Steel handed out the first pay raises in two years and year-end bonuses averaging 5%. It also sweetened its health-insurance coverage, added overtime and began offering employees $500 bonuses for referring new hires.

The company, which heats railroad-car axles and rolls them into “rebar,” reinforcing bar used in construction, has overhauled its furnaces and cooling, cutting and bundling operation. Byer, which also recycles scrap, bought out some leases and paid down debt.

But profit margins started to shrink late in the fourth quarter, and new U.S. production is coming online.

Byer Steel is holding off on investments that aren’t crucial to its ongoing operation, such as a $6 million advanced material-processing system that would boost productivity, product quality and worker safety.

“It’s difficult, given the uncertainties right now, to make long-term strategic decisions,” said Byer Steel President Jonas Allen.

Three hundred fifty miles away, Laclede Chain is also grappling with uncertainty. The company bends, shapes and welds steel rod into chains used for hoisting, tie-downs and tire traction.

Sales at the company’s largest unit increased 10% in 2018 compared with the previous year, with business up 25% in the first quarter and then flat for the rest of the year.

Keeping costs down has taken precedence over boosting output. Laclede is currently upgrading a small computer used in manufacturing so that it provides more real-time data on the quality of output, which could reduce waste. To limit costs, the work is being done by an internal team instead of an outside contractor.

Laclede has replaced a companywide incentive program, based on monthly targets, with more frequent department-specific measures, such as pounds produced per day. Workers now “can see the target clearly on a display every day so they can see what their progress is,” Mr. Riley said. “It makes it easier for them to visualize the goal for the week, month and quarter.”

Fears the company would lose orders because of higher costs haven’t materialized. Tariffs imposed in September on steel chains imported from China have reduced the price gap between Laclede’s U.S.-made chains and Chinese products.

“Prices have gone up,” said Mr. Riley. “Customers have had to keep doing business. They’ve adjusted to the new normal.”

Laclede now has 205 employees, up five from its recent low in June, and has added some overtime to keep up with demand, which rose about 5% in January compared with the previous year.

Given all the uncertainty, customers are on the fence about placing large orders or moving forward with bigger projects, Mr. Riley said. “This year we are starting to grow again,” he added. “We are in a good situation, but we don’t know how long it will last.”

Write to Ruth Simon at ruth.simon@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
frame of article is: business
###
article: "U.S. Steel has announced that they will invest $750 million at their 110-year-old steel manufacturing plant known as Gary Works in Gary, Indiana, crediting President Trump’s protective tariffs on steel imports.
What was once the largest steel mill in the world will now get a $750 million facelift thanks to Trump’s 25 percent tariff on all imported steel into the United States, designed to protect American industries and jobs from being outsourced.
In a statement this week, U.S. Steel executives said they would be revitalizing the Indiana plant which employs about 3,800 American workers, the Chicago Tribune noted.
While U.S. Steel executives say they are not yet planning to increase the number of jobs at the Indiana plant, U.S. Steel Corp. President and CEO David Burritt said the company is “experiencing a renaissance” because of Trump’s tariffs.
“We are pleased to be making this significant investment at Gary Works, which will improve the facility’s environmental performance, bolster our competitiveness and benefit the local community for years to come,” Burritt said in a statement.
“We are experiencing a renaissance at U.S. Steel,” Burritt said.
That manufacturing renaissance for U.S. Steel comes after decades of free trade policies which incentivized American companies to readily outsource their labor force to foreign countries.
Since 2001, free trade with China has cost millions of Americans their jobs. Between 2001 and 2015, about 3.4 million U.S. jobs were lost due to the country’s trade deficit with China, as Breitbart News reported.
Of the 3.4 million U.S. jobs lost in that time period, about 2.6 million were lost in the crippled manufacturing industry, making up about three-fourths of the loss of jobs from the U.S.-Chinese trade deficit.
Already, though, Trump’s tariffs have created 11,100 American jobs in six months. There have been 20 times as many U.S. jobs created because of the tariffs than those jobs that have been lost.
John Binder is a reporter for Breitbart News. Follow him on Twitter at @JxhnBinder.
."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "President Trump on Thursday said he will impose punishing tariffs on imported steel and aluminum in a major escalation of his “America First” trade offensive, defying Republican congressional leaders, inviting retaliation by U.S. trading partners and shaking the stock market.
Speaking at the White House, the president said he had decided to levy tariffs of 25 percent on foreign-made steel and 10 percent on aluminum.
“We’ll be imposing tariffs on steel imports and tariffs on aluminum imports, and you’re going to see a lot of good things happen,” Trump said. “You’re going to see expansions of the companies.”
Trump’s move, under a little-used national security provision of U.S. trade law, is expected to trigger legal challenges by China, the European Union and Brazil at the World Trade Organization. It also prompted predictions that it will backfire on American farmers and other exporters.
“It’s pretty much our worst fears,” said Rufus Yerxa, president of the National Foreign Trade Council, which represents multinationals such as Microsoft and Caterpillar. “This is a pretty clear indication that the Trump administration cares more about the old economy than it does the new economy.”
[‘Volatility is back’: Dow closes down more than 400 points]
Trump’s statement followed hours of drama and confusion. The president initially planned a formal announcement for Thursday morning, canceled it amid pushback from opponents, and then finally disclosed the new trade barriers after meeting with 15 industry executives.
“People have no idea how badly our country has been mistreated,” Trump said. “We’re bringing it all back.”
Canada, one of the United States’ closest allies, blasted the step as “absolutely unacceptable” and vowed to respond when the levies take effect.
Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the European Commission, dismissed Trump’s national security justification and said the tariffs were “a blatant intervention to protect U.S. domestic industry.”
He added, “We will not sit idly while our industry is hit with unfair measures that put thousands of European jobs at risk.”
Investors appeared shaken by the news. The Dow Jones industrial average sank 586 points, a loss of more than 2 percent, in early-afternoon trading before closing off 420 points.
Trump’s tariff jab scrambled political lines, drawing condemnations from Republicans and conservative groups while earning applause from some Democrats.
“This welcome action is long overdue for shuttered steel plants across Ohio and steelworkers who live in fear that their jobs will be the next victims of Chinese cheating,” said Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio.) “If we fail to stand up for steel jobs today, China will come after other jobs up and down the supply chain tomorrow.”
For months, leading Republicans have trooped to the White House in the hopes of persuading Trump not to implement his plans to tear up trade agreements and levy tariffs on foreign goods. The president has listened, in recent weeks stressing hopes of negotiating an improved North American Free Trade Agreement rather than quitting the existing deal.
But on Thursday he highlighted the wide gap between his nationalist economic views and the traditionally pro-trade Republican mainstream, going beyond the toughest of the three options he had been presented.
“The President is proposing a massive tax increase on American families. Protectionism is weak, not strong,” Sen. Ben Sasse (R-Neb.) said in a statement. “You’d expect a policy this bad from a leftist administration, not a supposedly Republican one.”
Sen. Patrick J. Toomey (R-Pa.), in a statement, called the president’s decision “a big mistake that will increase costs on American consumers, cost our country jobs, and invite retaliation from other countries.”
Adam Brandon, president of the conservative group FreedomWorks, warned that new trade taxes “could be a lethal blow to all the economic success this administration has ushered in.”
The core of the problem for steel and aluminum producers is massive excess capacity in China. Annual excess steel production globally last year was 700 million tons, or more than seven times U.S. consumption.
All that surplus steel creates a buyer’s market and depresses prices, the Commerce Department said last month in recommending import limits.
In a slap at China, Trump announced the tariffs even as a top Chinese economic official was in Washington for talks aimed at forestalling a possible trade war. Liu He, one of Chinese President Xi Jinping’s closest aides, was scheduled to meet with senior administration officials in a bid to restart a direct economic dialogue that lagged last year.
The United States already has 169 trade taxes in place on various types of imported steel, including 29 on Chinese products. Some of the nation’s largest steelmakers, which sought the new tariffs, also are in good shape financially, with Nucor reporting a $1.1 billion profit last year.
Trump promised that the new tariffs would lead to “new jobs popping up” and spoke nostalgically about the industry. “If you could ever make U.S. Steel like it used to be, we’d be very happy. And I actually think it’s possible,” the president said.
U.S. Steel Corp. employs roughly 30,000 people today, down from around 200,000 in the 1960s.
Trump’s remarks left unanswered specifics about whether the tariffs will apply to U.S. allies such as Canada and the E.U. Several steelmakers — such as ArcelorMittal and Nucor — have production facilities on both sides of the border. The United States also runs a surplus in its iron and steel trade with its northern neighbor.
For nearly a quarter-century under U.S. law, Canada has been considered part of the U.S. defense industrial base, as if its factories were American.
“Applying tariffs to Canada, despite its being part of the U.S. defense industrial base since the 1940s, will strengthen WTO claims that this decision is not really about national security,” said John Veroneau, a George W. Bush administration trade official now with the firm Covington & Burling.
Axel Eggert, head of the European Steel Association, said Trump’s move could cut European steel shipments to the United States by half.
Trump also rejected pleas from companies that are heavy users of steel and aluminum, including automakers and the beer industry, which warned that higher prices would hurt sales and potentially lead to layoffs. In 2002, the last time the United States imposed steel tariffs, steel users blamed the measures for the loss of up to 200,000 jobs.
Steel prices began moving Thursday as word of the tariffs leaked. One benchmark, for hot-rolled coil steel, posted a two-day rise of nearly 13 percent.
The aluminum tariff is forecast to create about 1,900 jobs at smelters — but will destroy 23,000 to 90,000 jobs in other manufacturing sectors, said Jorge Vazquez, managing director of Harbor Aluminum.
Agriculture has historically been a top target for retaliatory trade actions, and U.S. farm groups have warned that this time will be no different. Already, China is eyeing new duties on U.S. sorghum following the Trump administration’s decision in January to impose tariffs on washing machines and solar panels.
The damage to U.S. farmers, especially the soybean industry, could be substantial should China retaliate. U.S. farmers exported $14.2 billion worth of soybeans to China in 2016, nine times as much as was sold to the next-largest U.S. export market.
Other nations also have vowed to strike back.
According to Farmers for Free Trade, a bipartisan group, previous trade spats with Canada and Mexico have triggered crippling tariffs on U.S. produce, dairy products, pork, wine, beer and cheese.
“These tariffs are very likely to accelerate a tit-for-tat approach on trade, putting U.S. agricultural exports in the crosshairs,” Brian Kuehl, the group’s executive director, said in a statement. “Everyone agrees we need to hold our trading partners accountable, but taking unilateral action to raise tariffs carries harmful unintended consequences.”"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "The Trump economic boom is picking up steam as American heads into the final weeks of the president’s first year in office.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Nowcast, which attempts to estimate economic output based on the latest releases of data, now says GDP appears to be growing at a 4% annualized rate in the fourth quarter. That is the highest level on record for the Nowcast, which was launched just two years ago.
The Nowcast was revised up primarily due to positive impacts of revisions of earlier data, the New York Fed’s website said Friday.
A similar tool from the Atlanta Fed was also revised up earlier this week to 3.3 percent. The Atlanta Fed measure has a track record of being considerably more pessimistic about growth than the New York Fed’s Nowcast.
If the Nowcast turns out to be on track, the fourth quarter will see the economy grow far more than most major forecasts had expected. A survey of economists completed at the end of the third quarter saw economic growth coming in at just 2.5 percent.
Comment count on this article reflects comments made on Breitbart.com and Facebook. Visit Breitbart's Facebook Page."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "U.S. GDP Falls 1.4% as Economy Shrinks for First Time Since Early in Pandemic
Supply disruptions weighed on the economy, but consumers and businesses continue to spend
The U.S. economy shrank in the first quarter as supply disruptions weighed on output, but underlying strength in consumer and business spending suggested growth will soon resume.
The decline in U.S. gross domestic product at a 1.4% annual rate marked a sharp reversal from a 6.9% annual growth rate in the fourth quarter, the Commerce Department said Thursday. The first quarter was the weakest since spring 2020, when the Covid-19 pandemic and related shutdowns drove the U.S. economy into a deep—albeit short—recession.
To Read the Full Story
Continue reading your article with
View Membership Options
a WSJ membership
Sponsored Offers
-
Expedia:
Expedia Special Promo - Minimum of 30% off for members
-
TurboTax:
Save up to an additional $15 with TurboTax May 2022
-
Priceline:
Exclusive: Extra 5% off stays with Priceline promo code
-
Wayfair:
Extra 15% off + free shipping at Wayfair
-
H&R Block Tax:
H&R Block Tax Sale - Up to 20% off tax software"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Aug. 20, 2007 5:42 pm ET

Investors sent yields on short-term Treasurys tumbling amid heavy flight-to-safety demand, while stocks ended little changed Monday.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 42.27 points to 13121.35, managing to grasp hold of a late gain in another session marked by broad swings. The index was down more than 96 points at its low for the day, and up more than 102 at its peak. Other stock benchmarks were narrowly mixed. The Standard & Poor's 500 declined 0.39 to 1445.55, while the Nasdaq Composite Index climbed 3.56 to end at 2508.59.

Caution appeared the order of the day for equities following Friday's steep rally on the heels of the Federal Reserve's decision to slash its discount rate, which it charges on loans to banks, from 6.25% to 5.75%. "The market is still bouncing around in a big way, so it's important to be careful and cautious," said Andrew Brooks, head trader at T. Rowe Price.

Trading was somewhat light by recent standards, suggesting many investors are still trying to determine the impact of the Fed's move. "You're not seeing a lot of volume [in stocks]. Today people are just taking a pause," said Bill Nichols, trader at Bear Stearns.

There was plenty of action in the government-securities market, however, as short-term Treasury bills saw strong demand amid a flight to safety in the credit markets. The three-month yield logged its steepest decline since January 1989, according to Ryan ALM, before ending at 3.049%, a plunge of more than 70 basis points. Yields move inversely to bond prices. The one-month bill's yield skidded more than 61 basis points to wrap up the session at 2.347%, its third-steepest drop since July 31, 2001. The benchmark 10-year Treasury rose 10/32, lowering its yield to 4.634%.

"Principal protection is the name of the game," George Goncalves, Treasurys and agency strategist at Morgan Stanley, said. "There's a massive amount of demand."

Much of that demand is coming from money-market funds, which invest in government securities, commercial paper and repurchase agreements, among other things. The funds, which are supposed to be comprised of safe, liquid investments, ran into trouble as liquidity drained out of the market in recent weeks. Snapping up short Treasurys gives the funds an added level of certainty.

Maryann Hurley, vice president at D.A. Davidson, said investors are buying bills "as an alternative to the commercial paper they would normally use." Commercial paper is a term for short-term obligations issued by borrowers such as banks and corporations.

Central banks were meanwhile continuing efforts to calm the waters. The Bank of Japan, European Central Bank and Federal Reserve all either injected more liquidity today or signaled they would do so soon, continuing actions from the past two weeks. Liquidity is the ability to trade assets easily or turn them into cash; many of the market's recent problems have been caused by a drying up of people willing to buy certain types of securities, and the liquidity injections have been designed to restore order in many of those arenas.

"Resolving liquidity issues and repricing or finding fair market value for this volume of debt could take a while, and the markets are going to be jittery until that is complete," said Alan Gayle, senior investment strategist at Trusco Capital Management. "I don't think this correction process is quite complete&hellip; but this volatility and stress creates opportunity" to buy stocks at relatively low prices.

Investors were also trying to handicap the chances that the Fed would cut its key federal-funds rate -- and if so, when that would happen. Fed-funds futures were pricing in a good chance of a rate cut at the Fed's Sept. 18 meeting, or possibly even earlier.

"I don't think you need a lot at this point to trigger a move," said David Ader, head of government-bond strategy at RBS Greenwich Capital. "You would have to see more turmoil in the equity or credit markets&hellip; Or, more worrisome to the Fed in the longer term, would be a downturn in the economic indicators" such as weakness in employment.

The financial sector, seen by many as a strong determinant of market direction recently, was lower after doing well the past couple sessions. Bear Stearns declined 1.6%, while Lehman Brothers fell 1.8% and J.P. Morgan Chase JPM 1.35%increase; green up pointing triangle declined 1.5%. Deutsche Bank declined 2% amid a report from the Financial Times that it had gone to the Fed's discount window. But shares of KKR Financial Holdings rose 8.6% after the company said it agreed to sell 16 million shares to institutional investors to raise $230 million.

The housing industry got some mixed news from Lowe's LOW 1.86%increase; green up pointing triangle, which rose 6.1% after it said second-quarter net income rose 9%, but lowered its full-year earnings outlook because the housing-market downturn is expected to hurt sales. And mortgage lender Countrywide Financial fell 7.6% after Keefe Bruyette said the company can fall back on its banking operations for liquidity, but there's a "meaningful" threat of depositors withdrawing their funds; this, despite a big newspaper-ad campaign Monday reassuring investors that the bank is "well-capitalized" and that "the future is bright."

After the closing bell, Capital One Financial announced plans to shutter its struggling GreenPoint mortgage unit; shares had fallen 3% during regular trading.

Crude-oil prices fell 86 cents to $71.12 a barrel as Hurricane Dean looks likely to avoid key installations in the Gulf of Mexico. That pressured the energy sector overall.

In major market action:

Stocks advanced. On the New York Stock Exchange Monday, 2,009 stocks rose and 1,331 declined, on volume of 1.53 billion shares traded on the exchange.

Bonds climbed. The benchmark 10-year note added 11/32, or $3.4375 for every $1,000 invested, yielding 4.645% Monday. The 30-year bond was up 12/32, to yield 4.980%.

The dollar gained. The dollar was at 114.86 yen from 114.21 yen late Friday. The euro traded at $1.3483 from $1.3491 late Friday.

Write to Joanna L. Ossinger at Joanna. Ossinger@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "U.S. Stocks Climb on Hopes for Trade Talks
Bond yields climb; Dow industrials close more than 300 points higher
U.S. stocks rallied Thursday amid renewed hopes for progress in the trade dispute between the U.S. and China.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average climbed 326.15 points, or 1.3%, to 26362.25. The S&P 500 added 36.64 points, or 1.3%, to 2924.58, led by gains in trade-sensitive technology and industrial stocks. The technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite rose 116.51 points, or 1.5%, to 7973.39.
Analysts and investors said the gains were driven in part by optimism on the prospects for face-to-face talks in Washington next month among representatives of the world’s two biggest economies.
Share Your Thoughts
Stocks and bonds have been on a tumultuous ride this summer. How have you been affected by the swings? Join the conversation below.
Meanwhile, a batch of steady economic data and stronger-than-expected earnings reports from discount retailers also helped ease some of the fears that have been building about slowing economic growth.
A spokesman for China’s Commerce Ministry said Thursday that the U.S. and China remain in communication over possible talks in September and added that Beijing hopes to prioritize discussions about removing the latest tariffs announced by President Trump to prevent a further escalation of the trade war.
“China and trade continue to be a wild card,” said Terry Sandven, chief equity strategist at U.S. Bank Wealth Management. “Clearly, the dialogue between Washington and Beijing is good, but more importantly the timing and magnitude of any potential trade agreement remains an unknown.”
Shares of industrial conglomerates Caterpillar and Stanley Black & Decker climbed 2.5% and 2.3%, respectively. Meanwhile, shares of chip makers including Nvidia, Micron Technology and Applied Materials—which have been caught in the crosshairs of the trade battle—added at least 3% apiece.
“Any news around negotiations starting up or retaliations not happening are going to have a move in markets,” said Bert Colijn, senior eurozone economist at Dutch financial-services firm ING Group.
Stocks have had a turbulent August amid renewed anxieties surrounding trade, with all three major indexes down at least 1.9% this month. The indexes are still sitting within about 4% of their records.
Thursday’s gain for the S&P 500 marked its 11th move of at least 1%—higher or lower—in August, the most such moves since February 2018, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
With an array of apparel, electronics and sporting goods from China set to be hit with levies of 10% beginning Sept. 1, analysts said some investors were increasing their positions in defensive corners of the stock market this month as a way to shield their portfolios. So-called safety stocks including utilities, real estate and consumer staples—which are each up at least 1.8% apiece in August—are the only groups in the S&P 500 on pace to notch gains this month.
“Investors really want to start covering their positions because anything can happen over the weekend on the trade front,” said Diane Jaffee, senior portfolio manager at global asset-management firm TCW.
In Thursday’s action, shares of Best Buy fell $5.51, or 8%, to $63.49, after the consumer electronics retailer reported second-quarter sales that disappointed investors.
Discount retailers got a lift, with shares of Dollar General rallying $15.06, or 11%, to $156.09, on stronger-than-expected earnings.
Investors were also sorting through new economic data. U.S. gross domestic product—the broadest measure of the nation’s output of goods and services—rose at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 2% in the second quarter, compared with the previous estimate of a 2.1% rise. The government said consumers spent more than previously estimated in the April-to-June period, but the housing sector, exports and inventory investment were more of a drag than initially thought.
Meanwhile, U.S. jobless claims rose slightly to 215,000 last week, though the figure remains at a historically low level.
The yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury climbed to 1.520% Thursday from 1.469% Wednesday, while the two-year Treasury yield rose to 1.532% from 1.504%. Yields fall as bond prices rise.
Elsewhere, the Stoxx Europe 600 rose 1%. In Asia, the Shanghai Composite and Japan’s Nikkei both slipped 0.1%, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng rose 0.3%.
Write to Jessica Menton at Jessica.Menton@wsj.com and Caitlin Ostroff at caitlin.ostroff@wsj.com
Copyright ©2019 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "The U.S. economy grew at an annual rate of 2.3 percent in the first three months of 2018, the Commerce Department said Friday.
The results were slightly above Wall Street analysts’ forecasts of 2 percent annual growth rate and represented an expected slowing from the fourth quarter’s 2.9 percent growth rate.
The $20 trillion economy also turned in a better showing than most recent first quarters, which government reports have struggled to accurately assess because of seasonal issues. Financial market reaction was subdued in early trading.
The Commerce Department report was the first since President Trump’s tax cut took effect on January 1. The centerpiece of the tax overhaul was a reduction in corporate taxes aimed at boosting investment and jobs. So far, the results are mixed. The Commerce Department report showed a robust contribution from business investment, which rose more than 6 percent.
That seemed at odds with Thursday’s Census Bureau report that nondefense capital goods orders, excluding aircraft, fell 0.1 percent in March and that preliminary results from earlier months had been revised lower.
Weakness in the GDP report also was evident in government outlays and consumer spending, which slowed to a 1.1 percent gain from 4 percent in the final quarter of 2017. Slumping auto sales were a major contributor.
“The trend is probably better than what you’re seeing,” said economist Jim O’Sullivan of High-Frequency Economics. “Quarterly data are volatile. You never want to get too caught up in a single number.”
Gains from the tax cut are likely to be stronger in the second quarter as adjusted individual withholding allowances take full effect and tax refunds hit taxpayers’ bank accounts, O’Sullivan said.
Higher federal government spending also will make its mark with O’Sullivan expecting a second-quarter rebound to an annual rate of 3.7 percent.
Commerce Department analysts reported worrying signs of rising prices with a key price index, excluding volatile food and energy costs, rising 2.5 percent. That was the fastest pace since 2011 and it comes as Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell is trying to prevent the economy from growing so fast that it sparks a spiral of rising prices. The Fed, which wants to keep price increases to about 2 percent annually, raised short-term interest rates in March for the sixth time since 2015 when they were near zero.
“With clear signs that inflation is rising pretty rapidly now, the Fed will need to tighten more aggressively this year and that will lay the seeds for an economic slowdown starting next year,” economist Paul Ashworth of Capital Economics told clients.
Amid signs of labor market buoyancy, the Fed also raised its forecast, predicting the economy would grow this year at an annual rate of 2.7 percent, up from 2.5 percent in December. Employers around the country are reporting difficulty finding skilled workers with the unemployment rate at 4.1 percent and headed lower. First-time claims for unemployment insurance fell to 209,000 in the week through April 21, the lowest level since 1969.
“The Trump administration can stop looking for ways to bring jobs to America because almost everyone out there in the country who has a heartbeat has found employment already,” economist Chris Rupkey of MUFG Union Bank told clients in a research note Thursday.
The economy is steaming ahead despite worries over a potential trade war with China. The Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank manufacturing index rose sharply in April amid optimism about future orders. “Factory activity accelerated in April despite concerns among many firms about changes in international trade policy,” said economist Chad Wilkerson of the Kansas City Fed.
Since the expansion began nearly nine years ago, first-quarter economic growth has averaged just a 1.2 percent annual rate, less than half as fast as the other quarters, according to O’Sullivan of High-Frequency Economics.
Economists say that repeated economic softness in the early months of the year may be due to seasonal adjustment issues with government data. In July, the Bureau of Economic Analysis is scheduled to overhaul its approach to economic scorekeeping for the first time since 2013, in part, to take account of those concerns."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "So much for the idea that the economy is close to overheating.
A lower than expected retail sales number Wednesday has many economists revising down their forecast of first-quarter gross domestic product (GDP).
The Atlanta Fed’s GDPNow estimate fell to 1.9 percent, down from 2.5 percent just five days ago. At the start of February, the Atlanta Fed’s estimate called for GDP growth above 5 percent.
Economists at JP Morgan lowered their estimate to 2.0 percent, down from 2.5 percent. Goldman Sachs lowered its estimate from 2 percent to 1.8 percent.
U.S. retail sales fell for a third consecutive month in February, according to data released Wednesday by the Commerce Department. Economists had forecast a month-over-month gain of 0.3 percent in February. Instead, sales fell by 0.1 percent.
January’s decline, however, was revised to 0.1 percent, up from the initial read of 0.3 percent.
The decline was driven by a fall in purchases of big-ticket items such as cars and building materials.
Consumer spending appears to have slowed at the start of the year, after growing a 3.8 percent annualized rate in the fourth quarter. The slowdown suggests that those who warned the Trump tax cuts could cause the economy to overheat were off-track. If anything, it now appears that the tax cuts will give the economy a needed boost.
Comment count on this article reflects comments made on Breitbart.com and Facebook. Visit Breitbart's Facebook Page."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "The American economy is on track to deliver its strongest sustained growth in thirteen years.
The latest readings of gross domestic product see the economy growing at well above three percent in the final quarter of 2017. The GDPNOW predictor run by the Atlanta Fed forecasts 3.3 percent GDP growth. The New York Fed’s Nowcast forecasts 3.9 percent growth.
Despite the wide gap between the two readings of the economy, both agree that we appear to be growing at a rate above 3 percent. If that happens, it will be the third consecutive quarter of better than three percent growth. That’s something that has not happened since 2005.
Mainstream journalists and economists are starting to take notice. CNBC’s Patti Domm reports:
Economists in CNBC/Moody’s Analytics Survey upped their median fourth-quarter GDP forecast Friday by a median 0.4 to 3 percent. NatWest Markets raised fourth-quarter GDP to 3.5 percent from 2.7 percent, based on a stronger view of the consumer, and the Atlanta Fed GDPNow shows fourth-quarter growth now at a pace of 3.3 percent, from 2.8 percent earlier in the week.
When the White House said it expected 3 percent growth, economists were skeptical and many growth forecasts held to growth in the 2 percent range.
The first official reading of fourth quarter GDP will be revealed on January 26. Growth was 3.1 percent in the second quarter of 2017 and 3.2 percent in the third quarter.
Comment count on this article reflects comments made on Breitbart.com and Facebook. Visit Breitbart's Facebook Page."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "WASHINGTON (AP) — The U.S. economy grew at a better-than-expected 2.6% annual rate from July through September, snapping two straight quarters of economic contraction and overcoming punishingly high inflation and interest rates.
Thursday’s estimate from the Commerce Department showed that the nation’s gross domestic product — the broadest gauge of economic output — grew in the third quarter after having shrunk in the first half of 2022. Stronger exports and steady consumer spending, backed by a healthy job market, helped restore growth to the world’s biggest economy.
The latest GDP report comes as Americans, worried about inflation and the risk of a recession, have begun to vote in midterm elections that will determine whether President Joe Biden’s Democratic Party retains control of Congress. Inflation has become a signature issue for Republican attacks on the Democrats’ stewardship of the economy.
Consumer spending, which accounts for about 70% of U.S. economic activity, expanded at a 1.4% annual pace in the July-September quarter, down from a 2% rate from April through June. Last quarter’s growth also got a big boost from exports, which shot up at an annual pace of 14.4%. Government spending also helped: It rose at a 2.4% annual pace, the first such increase since early last year, with sharply higher defense spending leading the way.
Housing investment, though, plunged at a 26% annual pace, hammered by surging mortgage rates as the Federal Reserve aggressively raises borrowing costs to combat chronic inflation. It was the sixth straight quarterly drop in residential investment.
Overall, the outlook for the overall economy has darkened. The Fed has raised interest rates five times this year and is set to do so again next week and in December. Chair Jerome Powell has warned that the Fed’s hikes will bring “pain” in the form of higher unemployment. Concern about the likelihood of a recession next year has been growing.
“Looking ahead, risks are to the downside, to consumption in particular, as households continue to face challenges from high prices and likely slower job growth going forward,’’ Rubeela Farooqi, chief U.S. economist at High Frequency Economics, wrote in a research note.
With inflation still near a 40-year high, steady price spikes have been pressuring households across the country. At the same time, rising interest rates have derailed the housing market and are likely to inflict broader damage over time. The outlook for the world economy, too, grows bleaker the longer that Russia’s war against Ukraine drags on.
Economists noted that the third-quarter gain in GDP could be traced entirely to the surge in exports, which added 2.7 percentage points to the economy’s expansion. Export growth will be difficult to sustain as the global economy weakens and a strong U.S. dollar makes American products pricier in foreign markets.
Thursday’s report offered some encouraging news on inflation. A price index in the GDP data rose at a 4.1% annual rate from July through September, down from 9% in the April-June period — less than economists had expected and the smallest increase since the final three months of 2020. That figure could raise hopes that the Fed might decide it can soon slow its rate hikes.
Last quarter’s U.S. economic growth reversed annual declines of 1.6% from January through March and 0.6% from April through June. Consecutive quarters of declining economic output are one informal definition of a recession. But most economists have said they believe the economy skirted a recession, noting the still-resilient job market and steady spending by consumers. Most of them have expressed concern, though, that a recession is likely next year as the Fed steadily tightens credit.
Preston Caldwell, head of U.S. economics for the financial services firm Morningstar, noted that the economy’s contraction in the first half of the year was caused largely by factors that don’t reflect its underlying health and so “very likely did not constitute a genuine economic slowdown.” He pointed, for example, to a drop in business inventories, a cyclical event that tends to reverse itself over time.
Higher borrowing costs have weakened the home market, in particular. The average rate on a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage, just 3.09% a year ago, is approaching 7%. Sales of existing homes have fallen for eight straight months. Construction of new homes is down nearly 8% from a year ago.
Still, the economy retains pockets of strength. One is the vitally important job market. Employers have added an average of 420,000 jobs a month this year, putting 2022 on track to be the second-best year for job creation (behind 2021) in Labor Department records going back to 1940. The unemployment rate was 3.5% last month, matching a half-century low.
Hiring has been decelerating, though. In September, the economy added 263,000 jobs — solid but the lowest total since April 2021.
International events are causing further concerns. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has disrupted trade and raised prices of energy and food, creating a crisis for poor countries. The International Monetary Fund, citing the war, this month downgraded its outlook for the world economy in 2023."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Businesses slash investment, exports tumble and consumers show caution as GDP expands at 0.2% pace

Updated April 29, 2015 2:45 pm ET

WASHINGTON—The U.S. economy slowed to a crawl at the start of the year as businesses slashed investment, exports tumbled and consumers showed signs of caution, marking a return to the uneven growth that has been a hallmark of the nearly six-year economic expansion.

Gross domestic product, the broadest measure of goods and services produced across the economy, expanded at a 0.2% seasonally adjusted annual rate in the first quarter, the Commerce Department said Wednesday. The economy advanced at a 2.2% pace in the fourth quarter and 5% in the third.

Economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal had expected growth of 1% in the first three months of this year, though many were braced for a surprise to the downside.

The latest reading on the economy came hours before Federal Reserve officials released their policy statement, in which they said slower growth reflected, in part, “transitory factors.” The Fed gave no new explicit clues on the timing of interest-rate increases, but the slower growth made the timing a bit more uncertain.

The first-quarter figures repeat a common pattern in recent years: one or two strong readings followed by a sharp slowdown. First-quarter GDP growth had averaged 0.6% since 2010 and 2.9% for all other quarters. That has worked out to moderate overall expansion but no growth breakout.

“This is another quarterly number which confirms the long-term slow-growth thesis, but there are good odds we get a bit of a bounce later in the year from stabilized business spending and the housing markets, which are setting up quite promising,” Guy LeBas, chief fixed-income strategist at Janney Montgomery Scott, said in a note to clients.

Last year, economists pinned much of the blame for a bad first quarter—GDP shrank 2.1%—on unusually harsh weather. This year, multiple factors appear to be at work, including another bout of blizzards, disruptions at West Coast ports, the stronger dollar’s effect on exports and the impact of cheaper oil.

Better weather, a return to normal at port terminals and steadying investment could boost growth later this year.

“We expect the economy will rebound in [the second quarter] and beyond, similar to last year,” said Michelle Girard, economist at RBS Securities.

But not all the factors behind the slowdown appear temporary. A stronger dollar and cheaper oil could persist, keeping exports and energy-sector investment at bay.

As well, rising inventories kept the U.S. economy out of recession, contributing 0.74 percentage point to GDP in the first quarter. A second-quarter repeat is unlikely.

Joseph LaVorgna, chief U.S. economist at Deutsche Bank, said producers probably will allow inventory positions to run off rather than building them up even more. “This tells us that current-quarter growth is likely to run around 2.5%, not the 4% snapback we had previously been anticipating,” he said.

U.S. households will have to pick up spending to help the economy grow. Wednesday’s report showed consumer spending, which accounts for more than two-thirds of economic output, decelerated to a 1.9% pace in the first quarter, down from 4.4% growth in the fourth quarter.

Rather than using savings from cheaper gasoline to buy more goods and services, Americans have been setting money aside for a rainy day. The personal saving rate at 5.5% in the first quarter was the highest since 2012. The figure was 4.6% in the fourth quarter.

Another key driver of the economy, business spending, also has faltered of late. Nonresidential fixed investment—which reflects spending on software, research and development, equipment and structures—retreated at a 3.4% rate, compared with a 4.7% rise in the fourth quarter.

Energy companies in particular are feeling the effects of cheaper oil. Business investment in structures fell 23.1%, led by a 48.7% contraction for mining sector spending on shafts and wells, Commerce said.

A stronger dollar, meanwhile, has made domestically produced goods more expensive overseas and foreign products cheaper inside the U.S. Combined with disruptions at West Coast ports, trade was constrained. In the first quarter, exports fell at a 7.2% rate, compared with 4.5% growth in the fourth quarter. Imports rose 1.8%, compared with 10.4% in the fourth quarter.

Federal government spending added little to the economy in the first quarter, expanding 0.3%, compared with a 7.3% fall in the fourth quarter.

Real final sales of domestic product, a measure that excludes changes to inventories, shrank at a 0.5% pace, compared with a 2.3% rise in the fourth quarter.

Alongside weak growth in the quarter, prices fell.

The price index for personal consumption expenditures—the Fed’s preferred measure for inflation—declined at a 2% annual rate, well below the central bank’s 2% inflation growth target. Core prices, which exclude volatile food and energy components, were up 0.9%, the lowest level since 2010.

Write to Jeffrey Sparshott at jeffrey.sparshott@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "U.S. Economy Returned to Growth in Third Quarter
Gross domestic product increased 0.6 percent after two quarters of decline, but key components continue to show an economic slowdown.
This article is part of our Daily Business Briefing
The U.S. economy grew slowly over the summer, adding to fears of a looming recession — but also keeping alive the hope that one might be avoided.
Gross domestic product, adjusted for inflation, returned to growth in the third quarter after two consecutive quarterly contractions, according to government data released Thursday. But consumer spending slowed as inflation ate away at households’ buying power, and the sharp rise in interest rates led to the steepest contraction in the housing sector since the first months of the pandemic.
The report underscored the delicate balance facing the Federal Reserve as it tries to rein in the fastest inflation in four decades. Policymakers have aggressively raised interest rates in recent months — and are expected to do so again at their meeting next week — in an effort to cool off red-hot demand, which they believe has contributed to the rapid increase in prices. But they are trying to do so without snuffing out the recovery entirely.
The third-quarter data — G.D.P. rose 0.6 percent, the Commerce Department said, a 2.6 percent annual rate of growth — suggested that the path to such a “soft landing” remained open, but narrow.
“It’s good that the economy is not collapsing,” said Carola Frydman, an economist at Northwestern University. “To the extent that we manage growth that’s below trend, but not a complete collapse in consumption and investment, that would be the ideal scenario.”
Inflation F.A.Q.
What is inflation? Inflation is a loss of purchasing power over time, meaning your dollar will not go as far tomorrow as it did today. It is typically expressed as the annual change in prices for everyday goods and services such as food, furniture, apparel, transportation and toys.
President Biden cheered the report in a statement Thursday morning. “For months, doomsayers have been arguing that the U.S. economy is in a recession, and congressional Republicans have been rooting for a downturn,” he said. “But today we got further evidence that our economic recovery is continuing to power forward.”
By one common definition, the U.S. economy entered a recession when it experienced two straight quarters of shrinking G.D.P. at the start of the year. Officially, however, recessions are determined by a group of researchers at the National Bureau of Economic Research, who look at a broader array of indicators, including employment, income and spending.
Most analysts don’t believe the economy meets that more formal definition, and the third-quarter numbers — which slightly exceeded forecasters’ expectations — provided further evidence that a recession had not yet begun.
But the overall G.D.P. figures were skewed by the international trade component, which often exhibits big swings from one period to the next. Economists tend to focus on less volatile components, which have showed the recovery steadily losing momentum as the year has progressed. One closely watched measure suggested that private-sector demand stalled out almost completely in the third quarter.
“Ignore the headline number — growth rates are slowing,” said Michael Gapen, chief U.S. economist for Bank of America. “It wouldn’t take much further slowing from here to tip the economy into a recession.”
Consumer spending, the bedrock of the U.S. economy, rose 0.4 percent in the third quarter, down from a 0.5 percent increase in the quarter before. Spending on goods fell for the third consecutive quarter, while spending on services slowed but remained positive.
Consumer spending has continued to increase despite higher interest rates and rising prices, as consumers have drawn down savings to keep spending on vacations, restaurant meals and other in-person activities that many missed out on earlier in the pandemic. But it is unclear how long that can last. Americans saved 3.3 percent of their after-tax income in the third quarter, the smallest share since 2007.
“‘Borrowed time’ is how I would describe the consumer right now,” said Tim Quinlan, senior economist at Wells Fargo. “Credit card borrowing is up, saving is down, our costs are rising faster than our paychecks are.”
Understand Inflation and How It Affects You
- Inflation Calculator: How you experience inflation can vary greatly depending on your spending habits. Answer these seven questions to estimate your personal inflation rate.
- Tax Rates: The I.R.S. has made inflation adjustments for 2023, which could push many people into a lower tax bracket and reduce tax bills.
- Your Paycheck: Inflation is taking a bigger and bigger bite out of your wallet. Now, it’s going to affect the size of your paycheck next year.
- Cost of Living: As food prices rise, eating is becoming increasingly expensive. We took a close look at five New Yorkers’ food and drink habits to see where the effects are most felt.
Inflation slowed in the third quarter, as oil prices fell. That led to an increase in inflation-adjusted personal income, after a decline in the second quarter. But oil prices have since rebounded somewhat, and prices for food, rent and other essentials continue to rise.
The impact of rising interest rates is clear in the housing market, where home building and sales have both slowed sharply in recent months. The housing sector shrank 7.4 percent in the third quarter, subtracting 1.4 percentage points from the annualized growth rate in overall G.D.P. Businesses also cut investments in commercial and industrial buildings, and separate data released Thursday showed that a key measure of business investment fell in September.
The slowdown in housing is likely to lead to a further pullback in consumer spending as homeowners feel poorer and as fewer people buy homes and need to fill them with furniture and appliances. Mortgage rates passed 7 percent on Thursday, their highest level since 2002.
“Housing is just the single largest trigger to additional spending, and it’s not there anymore; it’s going in reverse,” said Diane Swonk, chief economist at the accounting firm KPMG. “This has been a stunning turnaround in housing, and when things start to go really quickly, you start to wonder, what are the knock-on effects, what are the spillover effects?”
The third quarter was in some sense a mirror image of the first quarter, when G.D.P. shrank but consumer spending was strong. In both cases, the swings were driven by international trade. Imports, which don’t count toward domestic production figures, soared early this year as the strong economic recovery led Americans to buy more goods from overseas. Exports slumped as the rest of the world recovered more slowly from the pandemic.
Both trends have begun to reverse as American consumers have shifted more of their spending toward services and away from imported goods, and as foreign demand for American-made goods has recovered. Supply-chain disruptions have added to the volatility, leading to big swings in the data from quarter to quarter.
Few economists expect the strong trade figures from the third quarter to continue, especially because the strong dollar will make American goods less attractive overseas.
Jim Tankersley contributed reporting."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "U.S. Economy Roars Back, Grew 2.9% in Third Quarter
Growth rate was the fastest recorded in two years after expanding an anemic 1.4% in the second quarter
WASHINGTON—U.S. economic growth accelerated last quarter, easing fears of a near-term slowdown but doing little to change the trajectory of a long but weak expansion.
Gross domestic product, a broad measure of goods and services produced across the economy, expanded at an inflation- and seasonally adjusted 2.9% annual rate in the third quarter, the Commerce Department said Friday. That was stronger growth than the second quarter’s pace of 1.4%. Economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal expected growth at a 2.5% pace for the July-to-September period.
Last quarter’s growth rate was the fastest recorded in two years.
The third-quarter acceleration largely reflected increased exports and a buildup of inventories, while consumer spending increased at a slower rate.
The latest data “do not point towards a new growth path but rather a strong rebound following one year of soggy growth,” said Joseph Brusuelas, chief economist at consulting firm RSM US.
Friday’s data also gave voters their last comprehensive look at the economy’s health before the November election.
The improvement could give Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton more latitude to position herself as the candidate to continue Obama administration policies that have led to a long expansion. Still, the most recent gain comes in the weakest expansion in recent memory, a point Republican candidate Donald Trump makes frequently.
Since the recession ended in mid-2009 the economy has grown at roughly a 2% annual rate, making the current expansion the weakest on records back to 1949.
Federal Reserve policy makers are likely to hold the central bank’s benchmark interest rate steady when they meet next week, but improved output gains could support the first increase in a year at their December meeting.
“Acceleration in growth in the third quarter, as well as continued improvement in the labor market and indications of higher inflation,” will lead the Fed “to boost the federal funds” in December, PNC Financial Services economists wrote in a note Friday.
The third-quarter GDP report showed consumer-spending gains slowed after a strong advance this spring. Personal-consumption expenditures rose at a 2.1% pace in the third quarter compared with a 4.3% gain during the prior period. Spending on long-lasting durable goods such as cars and appliances rose grew at better than 9% in the past two quarters.
Consumer spending accounts for about two-thirds of total output.
Exports, which add to GDP, increased at a 10% rate in the third quarter, the best gain in nearly three years. Export gains had slumped over the prior year and half, in part because a stronger dollar made U.S. good more expensive overseas. But separate data suggested that shipments of agricultural products, especially soybeans, supported the latest gain.
“Some of that surge was due to a one-off spike in soybean exports,” said Paul Ashworth, chief U.S. economist at Capital Economics. “But it is still a welcome sign that the dollar appreciation in 2014 and 2015 is no longer weighing on exporters.”
Imports, which subtract from domestic output, increased at a 2.3% rate. In total, trade contributed 0.83 percentage point to overall growth.
The change in private inventories, a drag on output the five previous quarters, contributed 0.61 percentage point to the overall growth rate in the third quarter. An increase in stockpiles could indicate businesses are more confident in future demand.
A measure of economic growth that excludes inventory effects, real final sales of domestic product, rose at a 2.3% pace in the third quarter, a slight slowdown compared with a 2.6% increase in the second quarter.
A measure of business spending, nonresidential fixed investment, rose at a 1.2% rate versus the prior quarter’s 1% advance. Firms increased spending on building structures, but reduced outlays on equipment for the fourth straight quarter. Spending on intellectual property, including research and development and software, advanced at a slower pace than in the prior quarter.
Rapid sales growth at Proto Labs Inc. slowed over the past year, particularly for clients tied to industrial equipment and commodities, said Chief Executive Officer Vicki Holt. The Maple Plain, Minn., manufacturer uses 3-D printing to create prototypes. “There’s just some cautiousness that I feel in the environment,” she said. “An increased number of customers tell us the reason they haven’t bought yet is because projects have been delayed or canceled.”
Spending on home building and improvements fell for the second straight quarter. Residential fixed investment declined at a 6.2% pace in the third quarter. Until this spring, residential investment had been a driver of economic growth since mid-2014.
Government spending advanced at a 0.5% rate last quarter, with stronger federal spending offsetting a decline at the state and local level.
The latest data suggests the economy this year isn’t likely to top 2015’s 2.6% growth rate, the best annual reading of the expansion. The economy has failed to grow better than a 3% in any year since 2005, and many economists expect such growth will remain a rarity. The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office projects GDP to grow at around 2% annually through 2026. Federal Reserve policy makers have pegged longer-run output gains at a 1.8% annual rate.
And while output advanced at a quicker rate last quarter, hiring was also stronger than in the second quarter. That could restrain improvement in worker productivity. Worker productivity has decreased for three straight quarters, through the midpoint of this year, and has been weak for much of the expansion. Productivity is a key ingredient in determining future growth in wages, prices and overall economic output.
Friday’s report showed inflation pressures eased during the summer.
The price index for personal-consumption expenditures rose at a 1.4% seasonally adjusted annual rate in the third quarter from the second. Consumer prices rose at a 2% rate during the second quarter. When excluding volatile food and energy costs, the price index increased at a 1.7% rate in the third quarter.
Corrections & Amplifications:
The gross domestic product report was released on Friday. An earlier version of this article online incorrectly stated the report came out on Thursday. (10/28)
Write to Eric Morath at eric.morath@wsj.com"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "This Year’s Selloff in Chinese Markets Isn’t Like 2015. It Looks Worse.
Several signs suggest that investors are responding rationally to signs of fundamental problems for China’s economy
SHANGHAI—This year’s selloff in China’s stocks and currency is reviving painful memories of the country’s last market rout, in the summer of 2015. If anything, things look more worrying this time around.
Shares in Shanghai are the world’s worst performing among major markets this year, tumbling 17%. The yuan has slumped 3.6% against the dollar since the start of June, pushed down by a combination of selling by nervous investors and the Chinese central bank’s efforts to guide the currency lower as a trade conflict with the U.S. escalates.
On paper, even those big market moves pale in comparison with 2015. Three years ago the Shanghai Composite Index lost nearly half its value in the two months starting in June, bottoming out only in early 2016: They have never since regained their mid-2015 highs. The central bank also shocked markets with an abrupt 2% devaluation of the yuan in August that year.
More concerning this time round is that several factors, including Beijing’s campaign against high debt levels and its trade war with the U.S., suggest that investors are responding rationally to signs of fundamental problems for China’s economy.
The U.S. placed tariffs on $34 billion worth of Chinese goods at midnight Eastern time on Friday. And while Shanghai stocks rose .5% on Friday, their fall this year has accelerated since trade tensions ramped up in the spring.
Related Coverage
By contrast, in 2015 the market boom and bust was driven by retail investors who—initially with government encouragement—had taken on piles of debt to bet on stocks, then rushed to sell when the market cooled.
“The 2015 market crash was like unexpectedly catching a fever that came fast but also went fast. What we are witnessing this time is a likely protracted decline,” said Landing Zhang, chief executive of Shanghai asset-management firm CYAMLAN Investment.
One big difference between this year and 2015 is that institutional investors, who typically take a longer-term view of markets, appear to be driving the equity-market selloff.
No breakdown of market trading by investor class is available, but a couple of factors indicate professionals are in the lead. First, much of this year’s Shanghai market slump is due to falling share prices of major state-owned Chinese companies such as Citic Securities and Baoshan Iron & Steel. Such blue-chip stocks are normally favored by big institutional investors.
“The latest selloff was definitely led by institutions, because in the past when the market fell, blue chips often bucked the trend. This time around, blue chips are falling, too, and it has been like a stampede,” said Amy Lin, a senior analyst at brokerage Capital Securities.
A sharp fall in the use of margin finance, which enables investors to bet on stocks with borrowed money, is a sign that China’s 90 million retail investors have had relatively less influence over this year’s market slump. The value of margin loans outstanding is down to 908.9 billion yuan ($137 billion) as of Thursday, less than half the record 2.1 trillion yuan right before the 2015 summer rout.
“Nobody, including myself and many of my friends, wants to invest in anything. There’s no confidence, and we are in no mood,” said Wu Yunfeng, a retail investor from Shanghai who said he hasn’t invested in stocks since last year.
Institutional investors’ increasingly pessimistic view of China’s outlook has started being borne out by economic data. Despite solid growth in the first quarter, figures for May showed a slowdown in areas including investment and retail sales. Beijing’s campaign against shadow-banking activity more than halved China’s overall credit supply in May.
“The economy was in better shape in 2015, and the stock market had rallied for a long time before the crash. There was also no trade war at that time,” Ms. Lin said.
For some, the market gloom is an overdue reflection of the difficult task policy makers in Beijing face in trying to juggle a financial-system housecleaning while protecting economic growth—all against the backdrop of a trade war.
China’s central bank has faced a dilemma when it comes to managing the yuan’s level against the dollar, too. Rising U.S. interest rates and slowing Chinese growth have created market pressure for the yuan to fall. Beijing may be happy to see the yuan slide, in part to offset any impact on its exports as trade tensions rise.
Still, policy makers are eager not to let the yuan drop too far, too fast, in case that encourages heavy capital outflows that could cause a liquidity shortage in China’s financial system.
“It does make sense to witness a shift in sentiment because we were always surprised by how sanguine Beijing has looked with its deleveraging campaign. We didn’t think it was priced in by the market,” said Julian Evans-Pritchard, Singapore-based economist at research firm Capital Economics.
Investor uncertainty over whether Beijing can pull off a deleveraging of China’s economy and avoid a significant slowdown has deepened amid some mixed signs from policy makers. While authorities have tried to cut back on credit by shadow-banking institutions, they have also freed up more funds for bank lending three times this year.
“The government wants to guide more money into the real economy, but it hasn’t been easy because investors aren’t showing lots of confidence in Chinese companies, especially those in the manufacturing sector,” said CYAMLAN Investment’s Mr. Zhang.
Write to Shen Hong at hong.shen@wsj.com"
frame of article is: other
###
article: "MANAMA, Bahrain — The U.S. special representative for Iran said Friday that European companies have a choice: Do business with the United States or do business with Iran, as Europe announced that a new system to allow trade with Tehran was in place.
The comments by Brian Hook came as European countries made a last-ditch effort to prevent Iran from breaching the terms of the 2015 nuclear deal, a move that could add to soaring tensions in the Persian Gulf.
Europe has been scrambling to come up with a mechanism to persuade Iran to stay within the limits of the deal, as Tehran complains that it no longer sees the economic benefit of the accord after the Trump administration pulled out and reimposed sanctions on the nation. Iran has indicated that if it does not receive some form of sanctions relief, it plans to exceed the limit of 300 kilograms (660 pounds) of low-enriched uranium that the country is allowed to possess under the nuclear agreement.
That threat added urgency to efforts by Britain, France and Germany to set up a complex barter system that would allow some trade with Iran to continue in order to keep Tehran from breaching the deal. The system is now operational, senior E.U. diplomat Helga Schmid said after a meeting of officials from the remaining E.U. signatories in Vienna on Friday. She said she expected more E.U. countries to join.
[Trump says war with Iran would not involve ground troops or last long]
European officials argue that maintaining the nuclear deal is crucial for regional stability. The United States has blamed Iran and its proxies for recent provocations in the Persian Gulf region, including attacks on petrochemical tankers in the Gulf of Oman and the downing of a U.S. surveillance drone over the Strait of Hormuz. Iran has denied involvement in the tanker attacks.
A U.S. official confirmed Friday that the United States had concluded that a May 14 drone attack on an oil pipeline in Saudi Arabia, originally thought to have been carried out by Houthi rebels in Yemen, had in fact been launched from Iraq. Iraq is home to numerous Iran-backed militias.
An Iraqi military spokesman declined to comment. The U.S. assessment was first reported by the Wall Street Journal.
Since the recent attacks, the United States has ramped up sanctions against Iran, which it had reinstated after withdrawing from the nuclear deal last year.
It is unclear if the European efforts to set up the alternative trading system to persuade Iran to stay within the deal’s stockpile limits will work. The key test — whether the barter system can succeed in processing a transaction — remains ahead.
Iran’s deputy foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, described the development as “positive” but said there is still a “gap” with Iran’s expectations under the deal, including the ability to sell oil. Tehran will study the development and make a decision on how to proceed, he said.
The Trump administration has been critical of the program, which it sees as an attempt to evade its sanctions. Speaking to reporters in London, Hook said the United States was willing to intensify sanctions, which he said would continue until Iran becomes a “normal” state.
“We will sanction any imports of Iranian crude oil,” he said, according to Reuters, adding that the United States was looking into reports of Iranian crude going to China.
Before pulling out last year, President Trump repeatedly denounced the deal, reached during the Obama administration between Iran and six world powers, including the United States, calling it “rotten.”
Meeting Friday with Chancellor Angela Merkel at the Group of 20 summit in Osaka, Japan, Trump urged the German leader to join the United States in keeping up “maximum” pressure on Iran, the White House said.
But Europe is doubling down on the nuclear deal. Austria, Belgium, Finland, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Spain and Sweden released a statement Friday stressing the importance of preserving the pact, describing it as a “major contribution to stability in the region.”
Iran has expressed skepticism about whether the European barter system, known as Instex, can give it sufficient economic benefit to stay in the deal but has described it as the “last chance.”
If the barter system fails to “meet Iran’s demands within the framework for the nuclear deal,” then Iran will “take the next steps more decisively,” Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman Abbas Mousavi told state television Friday.
Instex is aimed at shielding from U.S. sanctions small- to medium-size European companies that want to trade with Iran. It will initially focus on essential goods not subject to the sanctions, such as humanitarian, medical and agricultural products.
A new round of U.S. sanctions, targeting Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, and other senior Iranian officials, was announced by Washington on Monday.
Trump has said that after the downing of the U.S. Navy drone, which Iran said it hit with a surface-to-air missile, he was prepared to order a military strike against Iran. He said he called it off at the last minute because it would have inflicted disproportionate Iranian casualties.
U.S. officials have indicated that they would like to see Iran abide by the terms of the nuclear deal even though the United States withdrew from it. “Our sanctions do not give Iran the right to accelerate its nuclear program,” Hook said before a meeting in Paris on Thursday. “It can never get near a nuclear bomb.”
An Iranian breach of the stockpile limit would not put it significantly closer to building a nuclear weapon, but it would strike another blow to the tattered deal. The stockpile of uranium enriched to 3.67 percent is suitable for use as fuel in nuclear power plants but far short of the weapons-grade level of more than 90 percent needed for fissile material in a nuclear bomb.
On Thursday, Iranian media reported that Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif sent a letter to European Union foreign policy chief Federica Mogherini urging European signatories to stick by their commitments under the deal, with Iran’s next steps depending on that.
Mustafa Salim in Baghdad contributed to this report.
Read more:
Today’s coverage from Post correspondents around the world
Like Washington Post World on Facebook and stay updated on foreign news"
frame of article is: government
###
article: "The Trump administration on Monday moved to reimpose the first round of Iranian trade sanctions that had been suspended under a 2015 nuclear agreement, distancing itself from every other country that signed the deal and marking another decisive moment in the accord’s unraveling.
The renewed sanctions starkly highlighted the divisions between the United States and its allies. The Europeans that were parties to the agreement said they would protect their own companies from legal reprisals and work to maintain Iran’s access to the financial system and its continued export of oil and gas that forms a large share of its income.
“The JCPOA is working and delivering on its goal, namely to ensure that the Iranian programme remains exclusively peaceful,” said a statement from the European Union, Britain, France and Germany, using an acronym for the agreement officially known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
Monday’s announcement seemed to foreclose the likelihood that President Trump and Iranian President Hassan Rouhani would meet anytime soon, although both leaders said they are open to talks. Trump said Iran must significantly change its policies and behavior for sanctions to be lifted, and Rouhani said the United States should be prepared to discuss compensation for decades of intervention in Iran.
“We urge all nations to take such steps to make clear that the Iranian regime faces a choice,” said Trump in a statement. “Either change its threatening, destabilizing behavior and reintegrate with the global economy, or continue down a path of economic isolation.”
Rouhani slammed U.S. sanctions as ineffective, and boasted of Iran’s ties to the European Union, Russia and China, saying Beijing is Tehran’s “closest financial ally.”
The sanctions that take effect Tuesday, 90 days after Trump withdrew the United States from the landmark 2015 nuclear deal, prohibit Iran from using U.S. dollars, the primary currency for international financial transactions and oil purchases. Trade in metals and sales of Iranian-made cars are banned, and permits allowing the import of Iranian carpets and food, such as pistachios, are revoked. So are licenses that have allowed Tehran to buy U.S. and European aircraft and parts — a restriction that comes just days after Iran acquired five new commercial planes from Europe.
The resumption of sanctions leaves the nuclear agreement, once heralded as a historic breakthrough, on its final legs. Sanctions on petroleum will be restored Nov. 5. U.S. officials have advised other governments to begin winding down their purchases of Iranian oil, eventually to zero, to starve Tehran of its chief source of foreign income.
Those who don’t comply could be subject to “severe consequences,” Trump said.
[Trump administration’s use of sanctions draws concern]
The sanctions are the latest action Trump has taken to reverse programs that formed the backbone of President Barack Obama’s legacy, including the Paris climate agreement and a trade pact with Pacific Rim nations. Trump’s antipathy toward the Iran deal has been a theme since the 2016 campaign, when he derided it as the worst in history and insisted that he could secure better terms that also would address Iran’s support of militant groups, its ballistic missile tests and human rights abuses.
A number of prominent hawks on Iran are in the administration’s upper reaches, including Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and national security adviser John Bolton. They rarely mention Iran without calling it the world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism. Pompeo disparages the Iranians as the region’s leading “bad actors” who are guilty of all sorts of “malign activities,” including support for militants in Lebanon, Syria and Yemen.
In a background call to reporters, senior administration officials said Monday that their goal is twofold: to renegotiate the nuclear agreement and to change the government’s behavior. They openly sided with Iranian protesters who are unhappy with the faltering economy and social issues, but stopped short of calling on Iranians to rise up against their government, which they say has spent heavily on militias around the region instead of lifting up the fortunes of its citizens.
“None of this needs to happen,” one official said, adding, “The Iranian people should not suffer because of their regime’s hegemonic regional ambitions.”
In his statement, Trump slammed the Obama administration’s agreement, saying: “The JCPOA, a horrible, one-sided deal, failed to achieve the fundamental objective of blocking all paths to an Iranian nuclear bomb, and it threw a lifeline of cash to a murderous dictatorship that has continued to spread bloodshed, violence, and chaos.”
Trump said he remains “open to reaching a more comprehensive deal that addresses the full range of the regime’s malign activities, including its ballistic missile program and its support for terrorism.” And he hinted at his desire for the theocratic rulers of Iran to be replaced.
“The United States continues to stand with the long-suffering Iranian people, who are the rightful heirs to Iran’s rich heritage and the real victims of the regime’s policies,” he said. “We look forward to the day when the people of Iran, and all people across the region, can prosper together in safety and peace.”
In an interview on Fox News Channel, Bolton said Trump is serious in offering to meet with Iranian officials to talk about Tehran’s nuclear program and regional activities.
“If the ayatollahs want to get out from under the squeeze, they should come and sit down,” Bolton said.
But Rouhani seemed to dismiss the idea, suggesting that sanctions must be lifted before Iran would return to the negotiating table.
“When someone stabs you and then says, ‘Let’s talk,’ he is the one who should take out the knife in the first place,” he said in a televised speech.
One of the first reactions from Tehran came from Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif, who zeroed in on sanctions affecting the sale of commercial aircraft. Administration officials said Iran uses civilian planes to carry equipment and supplies to militias throughout the region.
“Trump Administration wants the world to believe it’s concerned about the Iranian people,” Zarif tweeted. “Yet the very first sanctions it reimposed have canceled licenses for sales of 200+ passenger jets under absurd pretexts, endangering ordinary Iranians. US hypocrisy knows no bounds.”
[How killing the nuclear deal could make it easier for Iran to pursue the bomb in secret]
Reaction in Congress was divided along party lines.
Democrats warned of the dangers of reimposing sanctions. “It risks reopening a resolved conflict, and will divide us further from our European allies,” said Sen. Richard J. Durbin (Ill.), who helped shepherd the deal through Congress.
Republicans welcomed the move as a brake on Iranian aggression. “Make Iran Great Again,” tweeted Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (S.C.). “Dump the Ayatollah!”
The International Atomic Energy Agency, which is charged with monitoring Iran’s nuclear program, has said in 11 consecutive reports that Tehran remains in compliance with the commitments it made.
The White House hopes the renewed sanctions will provide leverage over Tehran as it grapples with a collapsing economy. The Iranian rial has been in a free fall as the deadline for the first round of sanctions approached.
Iran’s Central Bank said it would ease foreign exchange rules to prop up its currency and allow access to hard currency at market rates. The rial has lost about half its value since the spring.
The administration officials said Iran’s economy has lagged in large part because of widespread corruption and domination by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps. One official noted that almost 100 foreign companies have announced their intention to leave the Iranian market.
“Foreign investors in Iran never know whether they are facilitating commerce or terrorism,” the official told reporters.
The sanctions will squeeze the Iranian economy even more, and Tehran has started talking about the need to return to a war footing with a “resistance” economy. The White House insists that it will ensure that sanctions are enforced.
“We are very intent on using these financial sanctions to great economic leverage,” another administration official said, characterizing the economy as on a downward spiral even before the sanctions decision was made. “There’s no question financial sanctions are going to continue to bring significant financial pressure against the world’s largest state sponsor of terror.”
Anne Gearan and Felicia Sonmez in Washington and Erin Cunningham in Istanbul contributed to this report."
frame of article is: government
###
article: "WASHINGTON — President Trump announced on Monday that he was imposing new sanctions on Iran, stepping up a policy of pressuring the nation’s leaders and further squeezing the Iranian economy in retaliation for what the United States says are recent aggressive acts by Tehran.
The move came on top of actions taken by the administration this spring to cut off all revenues from Iranian oil exports, the lifeblood of the nation’s economy.
The new sanctions are aimed at preventing some top Iranian officials from using the international banking system or any financial vehicles set up by European nations or other countries. But the Iranian officials most likely do not keep substantial assets in international banks, if any at all, or use those institutions for transactions, and any additional pressure from the new sanctions is likely to be minimal.
The largely symbolic nature of this round of sanctions indicates that the Trump administration is running low on arrows in its economic quiver. It now finds itself in a waiting game, as it watches for whether the latest clampdown on oil exports, which was announced in late April, will force the Iranian leaders to surrender to American demands in exchange for economic relief.
Speaking in the Oval Office, Mr. Trump said the new sanctions order would bar Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the supreme leader of Iran, and his office from access to the international financial system. The Treasury Department said it was also imposing sanctions on eight Iranian military commanders, including the head of a unit that the Americans say was responsible for shooting down an American drone last Thursday.
Mr. Trump acted at a time of rising concerns over Iran. Those have been prompted in part by declarations from Tehran that it is amassing more nuclear fuel, the latest evidence that Mr. Trump’s withdrawal last year from a nuclear containment deal is pushing Iranian leaders to violate terms they had been abiding by until now.
“We will continue to increase pressure on Tehran,” Mr. Trump said as he sat at his desk in the Oval Office preparing to sign an executive order. “Never can Iran have a nuclear weapon.”
While he warned on Monday that his restraint has limits, Mr. Trump has signaled that he prefers tightening sanctions to launching an immediate military strike to try to alter Iran’s behavior and force political change in Tehran.
But critics said the new sanctions would have little substantive effect and could further inflame tensions.
“Symbolic politics at its worst,” said Robert Malley, the president and chief executive of the International Crisis Group and a former senior Obama administration official on the Middle East. “At every level it is illogical, counterproductive or useless.”
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said the administration would add Mohammad Javad Zarif, Iran’s foreign minister and its top negotiator on the nuclear deal, to the sanctions list this week. (In his announcement about the sanctions on the supreme leader, Mr. Trump misspoke and said “Ayatollah Khomeini,” who died in 1989, rather than “Khamenei.”)
The inflation rate in Iran has risen to about 50 percent and many Iranians are dissatisfied with the economy, but authoritarian leaders have historically shown they can withstand stress from sanctions for many years. Some Iranian citizens also blame the United States government for the devastation of their economy, and they point to the shortage of critical medicine, even though Trump administration officials say they do not intend to limit humanitarian aid.
Iranian officials could choose to carry out nonfatal attacks on United States or international interests, as they did with the downing of the drone, to try to get the Trump administration to ease sanctions. Iran’s naval commander, Rear Adm. Hossein Khanzadi, said on Monday that the military was capable of shooting down other drones that violate Iranian airspace.
Mr. Trump said on Monday that he was willing to negotiate with Iran — “I think Iran, potentially, has a phenomenal future” — but insisted Iranian leaders would have to end their pursuit of nuclear weapons, as well as halt uranium enrichment, “fueling of foreign conflicts” and “belligerent acts directed against the United States and its allies.”
Mr. Trump always emphasizes the need to prevent Iran from getting a nuclear weapon, while his hawkish top foreign policy aides, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and John R. Bolton, the national security adviser, say Iran must also make wholesale changes to its policies in the Middle East.
International nuclear experts say Iran does not have an active nuclear weapons program and has been adhering to the terms of a landmark nuclear agreement that it reached in 2015 with world powers.
Mr. Trump withdrew from the deal in May 2018 and reimposed harsh sanctions. Iran said last week it would soon breach some limits on low-grade uranium in the deal, a type of fissile material used in civilian reactors. Iran would still be far from being able to make a nuclear weapon; its announcement appeared intended to pressure European nations to find ways to resume trade with Iran in order to alleviate the impact of American sanctions.
Mr. Trump’s rollout of sanctions and the effort to end all oil exports, along with an insistence by Mr. Pompeo that Tehran meet 12 expansive demands mostly unrelated to the nuclear program, “set a spark to the escalatory cycle we’re seeing today,” said Dalia Dassa Kaye, a Middle East expert at RAND Corporation, a research group in California.
“The administration argued maximum pressure would bring Iran to the negotiating table, but instead it brought provocative Iranian actions that are not likely to end without Iran getting something concrete on sanctions relief,” she said. “Talk about wanting to talk is not likely to be enough.”
China and Russia, who also signed the nuclear deal, have joined European nations in opposing the sanctions. European officials are trying to persuade Iran to stay in the agreement and are expected to speak with Mr. Trump about his Iran policy at the Group of 20 summit meeting this week in Japan.
Mr. Trump and his top foreign policy aides say further squeezing Iran will compel its leaders to buckle to demands to limit their nuclear program in ways that go beyond the terms of the 2015 deal, which was negotiated by the Obama administration and opposed by many Republicans, Israel and Arab nations in the Persian Gulf.
Hesameddin Ashena, an adviser to President Hassan Rouhani of Iran, said on Twitter that the “U.S.’s claim that it wants negotiations without preconditions while it increases sanctions and pressure is not acceptable.”
If the United States wants more than the 2015 nuclear deal, he said, “it must offer us more than the deal with international guarantees.”
On Monday afternoon, the Iranian ambassador to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi, told reporters that he had been barred from a closed-door meeting of the Security Council called by the United States. He also said there was no way Iran and the United States could have a dialogue right now.
The imposition of more sanctions could provoke further actions by Iran to add to the crisis that has unfolded since early May in the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman, analysts say.
American officials have blamed Iran for two separate sets of explosions on six oil tankers around the Strait of Hormuz, saying Iran is trying to increase global oil prices in retaliation for the administration’s “maximum pressure” campaign. Iranian officials have denied responsibility.
The downing of the drone prompted Mr. Trump to order a missile strike on Iranian military sites last Thursday, but he pulled back at the last minute after hours of debate, and instead opted for a cyberattack.
On Monday, Mr. Pompeo met at a palace in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, with King Salman, then had lunch with Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, whom the administration has supported despite his suspected role in the murder of Jamal Khashoggi, a Washington Post journalist, and in overseeing an air war that has killed thousands of civilians in Yemen. The State Department said Mr. Pompeo talked with the king and the prince about “heightened tensions in the region and the need for stronger maritime security to promote freedom of navigation in the Strait of Hormuz.”
Mr. Pompeo then flew to Abu Dhabi to meet with Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed over dinner. Mr. Pompeo told the prince that his nation should contribute money and military resources to a maritime security program for ships around the Strait of Hormuz. The Americans are calling it the Sentinel program, and Mr. Pompeo said it was supposed to involve 20 nations in addition to Saudi Arabia and the U.A.E.
“The president is keen that the United States doesn’t bear the cost of this,” Mr. Pompeo told the prince."
frame of article is: government
###
article: "WASHINGTON — The Trump administration on Wednesday imposed sanctions on an elaborate shipping network that Iran uses to sell oil, and unveiled a $15 million reward to anyone with information that disrupts the scheme, stepping up its effort to exert pressure on the Iranian economy.
The sanctions were the latest in a flurry of actions taken by the United States in recent days to further isolate Iran in hopes that it will return to the bargaining table to renegotiate an international agreement over its nuclear program. President Trump withdrew from the 2015 agreement in May 2018 and reinstated sanctions to limit Iranian oil sales, raising tensions with countries in Europe and Asia that have become reliant on Iran for energy.
The Treasury Department placed sanctions on 26 individuals and “entities” affiliated with the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps Quds Force, which the United States said has shipped approximately $500 million worth of Iranian oil in the last year. The sanctions freeze any assets held in the United States of those affiliated with the shipping network and prohibit them from doing business with Americans. The action also identifies 11 ships, placing anyone who owns or operates them on a Treasury list and exposing any port that lets them in, or firms that fuel or offload them, to future sanctions.
The shipping network is run by Rostam Ghasemi, Iran’s former minister of petroleum, and the United States said it has been used to facilitate the flow of money to Hezbollah and the government of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria. The United States considers Hezbollah a terrorist organization even though members of the group have embedded into legitimate parts of the Lebanese government.
“Iran continues to take provocative actions to destabilize the region and the world,” Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said in a statement. “Our actions over the last two weeks should serve as a strong warning to anyone considering facilitating the Quds Force’s oil sales that there will be swift consequences.”
As the United States stepped up sanctions pressure, Iran seemed to be pursuing a maximum-pressure strategy of its own.
After a series of seemingly conflicting announcements, President Hassan Rouhani said on Wednesday that he would announce new actions that would violate the terms of the nuclear deal, making it clear that Iran was trying to press Europe to make good on its promises to neuter American-led sanctions by compensating Tehran for lost oil sales.
He offered no details, other than to say the next move to step away from the accord would have an “extraordinary” effect on Iran’s nuclear program.
The announcement by the Trump administration came days after it imposed sanctions against Iran’s space program and against an Iranian oil tanker that had been detained in Gibraltar for weeks on suspicion of violating European Union sanctions by trying to transport oil to Syria. Earlier this summer, the United States imposed sanctions on Hezbollah officials that it accused of helping Iran.
Senior administration officials said on Wednesday that the recent actions against Iran were meant to send a message to countries around the world that they can do business with either Iran or the United States.
The Trump administration has been at odds with the European Union since abandoning the nuclear agreement. It has also warned China, which has continued to import Iranian oil, and in July imposed economic penalties on a Chinese company flouting American sanctions.
Underscoring the lengths that the Trump administration is willing to go to, the United States is for the first time using a counterterrorism rewards program to disrupt an arm of a foreign government.
Speaking to reporters at the White House on Wednesday, Mr. Trump said he believed that Iran wanted to make a deal with the United States, and he offered an assurance that he was not seeking regime change in Iran.
“They have tremendous potential, and I think they’re going to want to take advantage of that,” Mr. Trump said, according to a pool report.
Mr. Trump left open the possibility that he could meet with Mr. Rouhani of Iran at the United Nations General Assembly gathering in New York this month.
“Anything is possible,” he said.
Brian Hook, the State Department’s special envoy for Iran issues, said on Wednesday that the United States was prepared to pay up to $15 million to any person who offered information about the financial network run by the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps and its shadowy Quds Force. The money would be paid from the department’s Rewards for Justice program, which has spent more than $150 million since 1984 to track and stop terrorist activity across the world.
The Trump administration in April designated the Revolutionary Guards a foreign terrorist organization to hamper its support of Shiite militias elsewhere in the Middle East, and over concerns raised by some national security officials that Tehran would retaliate against American troops in the region.
“We have taken this step because the I.R.G.C. operates more like a terrorist organization than it does a government,” Mr. Hook told reporters at the State Department. He said the military unit was training, funding and equipping proxy militias, including Hezbollah in Syria as well as Hamas.
“Iran wants these groups to extend the borders of the regime’s revolution and sow chaos and sectarian violence,” Mr. Hook said.
Still, Mr. Hook insisted that Mr. Trump remained open to negotiations with Iran’s leaders, but added, “Iran never comes back to the negotiating table without diplomatic isolation, economic pressure or the threat of military force.”
“We think that this creates the right atmosphere that will lead, eventually, to talks,” Mr. Hook said. “But that’s a decision that the Iranians have to make.”
He refused to discuss a tentative proposal by President Emmanuel Macron of France to offer Iran a $15 billion bailout to keep it from violating the terms of the nuclear accord. Iran has threatened to raise its nuclear enrichment level to 20 percent, an announcement that could come as soon as this week, in the third direct but easily reversible violation of the deal.
“There is no proposal,” Mr. Hook said, noting that the offer by Mr. Macron had not been formally put forward, “and so we are not going to comment on something that doesn’t exist.”
Mr. Rouhani has adhered to his previously announced schedule of taking further steps away from the agreement every 60 days; the next deadline is Friday. But at the same time, he said he would continue to negotiate with European nations for another two months, a period that seemed intended to allow for some kind of negotiation, direct or indirect, with Washington.
One possible next step for Mr. Rouhani would be to announce that Iran is increasing the level to which it is enriching uranium. The agreement allows for enrichment to 3.67 percent, which is suitable for fuel for nuclear power plants, but not nuclear weapons. Iran has already exceeded that limit, inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency have confirmed, but only by a small margin. But based on statements by Iranian lawmakers, European officials expect Iran to announce that it is producing fuel at 20 percent enrichment, to supply a small reactor that produces medical isotopes in Tehran.
The 20 percent enrichment would be a concern because it is a relatively short leap to produce bomb-grade fuel. Iran says it has no intention of doing so. But the core of the 2015 agreement was to assure that it would take Iran more than a year to produce a bomb’s worth of weapons-grade material. Any prolonged move to 20 percent enrichment would shorten that timeline to under a year.
Iran may also install new centrifuges that enrich uranium at a far faster rate than the old models that were dismantled in 2015 and 2016. That, too, would speed the country’s ability to “break out” and produce bomb material.
Mr. Rouhani has often noted that each of these steps is easily reversible, if Iran gets the sanctions relief it demands. Mr. Hook called that “nuclear extortion” at the State Department; the Iranians say it is simply the mirror image of the American pressure campaign."
frame of article is: government
###
article: "Advertisement
Supported by
What’s the Yield Curve? ‘A Powerful Signal of Recessions’ Has Wall Street’s Attention
You can try to play down a trade war with China. You can brush off the impact of rising oil prices on corporate earnings.
But if you’re in the business of making economic predictions, it has become very difficult to disregard an important signal from the bond market.
The so-called yield curve is perilously close to predicting a recession — something it has done before with surprising accuracy — and it’s become a big topic on Wall Street.
Terms like “yield curve” can be mind-numbing if you’re not a bond trader, but the mechanics, practical impact and psychology of it are fairly straightforward. Here’s what the fuss is all about.
First, the mechanics.
The yield curve is basically the difference between interest rates on short-term United States government bonds, say, two-year Treasury notes, and long-term government bonds, like 10-year Treasury notes.
Typically, when an economy seems in good health, the rate on the longer-term bonds will be higher than short-term ones. The extra interest is to compensate, in part, for the risk that strong economic growth could set off a broad rise in prices, known as inflation. Lately, though, long-term bond yields have been stubbornly slow to rise — which suggests traders are concerned about long-term growth — even as the economy shows plenty of vitality.
At the same time, the Federal Reserve has been raising short-term rates, so the yield curve has been “flattening.” In other words, the gap between short-term interest rates and long-term rates is shrinking.
On Thursday, the gap between two-year and 10-year United States Treasury notes was roughly 0.34 percentage points. It was last at these levels in 2007 when the United States economy was heading into what was arguably the worst recession in almost 80 years.
As scary as references to the financial crisis makes things sound, flattening alone does not mean that the United States is doomed to slip into another recession. But if it keeps moving in this direction, eventually long-term interest rates will fall below short-term rates.
When that happens, the yield curve has “inverted.” An inversion is seen as “a powerful signal of recessions,” as the president of the New York Fed,John Williams, said this year, and that’s what everyone is watching for.
Every recession of the past 60 years has been preceded by an inverted yield curve, according to research from the San Francisco Fed. Curve inversions have “correctly signaled all nine recessions since 1955 and had only one false positive, in the mid-1960s, when an inversion was followed by an economic slowdown but not an official recession,” the bank’s researchers wrote in March.
Even if it hasn’t happened yet, the move in that direction has Wall Street’s attention.
“For economists, of course it’s always been traditionally a very good signal of directionality of the economy,” said Sonja Gibbs, senior director of capital markets at the Institute of International Finance. “That’s why everyone is bemoaning the flattening of the yield curve.”
Recession? Really?
Sure, it seems like a strange time to be worried about recession. Unemployment is at an 18-year low, corporate investment is picking up steam, and consumer spending shows signs of rebounding.
Some economists on Wall Street think the economy could be growing at around a nearly 5 percent annualized clip this quarter. But if the current economic vigor is only reflecting a short-term stimulus coming from the Trump administration’s tax cut, then some kind of slowdown is to be expected.
“It’s very hard to see what’s going to goose the economy further from these levels,” Ms. Gibbs said.
And the financial markets can sometimes sniff out problems with the economy before they show up in the official economic snapshots published on G.D.P. and unemployment. Another notable yield curve inversion occurred in February 2000, just before the stock market’s dot-com bubble burst.
In that sense, the government bond market isn’t alone. Stocks have been in a sideways struggle since the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index last peaked on Jan. 26. Returns on corporate bonds are negative, as are some key commodities tied to industrial activity.
An important caveat to the predictive power of the yield curve is that it can’t predict precisely when a recession will begin. In the past the recession has come in as little as six months, or as long as two years, after the inversion, the San Francisco Fed’s researchers note.
In other words, there’s a reason to look at the yield curve skeptically, despite its prowess at predicting recessions.
The new fear gauge.
As in all market moves, perceptions of its significance mean the yield curve can sometimes become a feedback loop.
If enough investors begin to grow concerned about a recession, they will most likely put more and more money into the safety of long-term government bonds. That buying binge would likely help flatten, or invert, the yield curve.
Then people will write articles about the curve’s sending a stronger signal on recession. And that could, in turn, drive even more people to buy into long-term bonds. Rinse. Repeat.
There’s also a practical impact.
But it’s not just psychology. The yield curve helps determine some of the decisions that are the most crucial to the health of the American economy.
Specifically, the flattening yield curve makes banking, which is basically the business of borrowing money at short-term rates and lending it at long-term rates, less profitable. And if the yield curve inverts, it means lending money becomes a losing proposition.
Either way, the flow of lending is likely to be curtailed. And in the United States, where borrowed money is the lifeblood of economic activity, that can slam the brakes on economic growth.
The Fed’s hand.
There is an argument to be made against reading too much into the yield curve’s moves — and it hangs on the idea that, rather than the free market, central banks have had a big influence on both the long-term and short-term rates.
Since the last recession, central banks bought trillions of dollars of government bonds as they tried to push long-term interest rates lower in order to lend a helping hand to the economy.
Even though they’re reversing course now, central banks still own massive amounts of those bonds, and that may be keeping long-term interest rates lower than they would otherwise be.
Also, the Federal Reserve has been raising short-term interest rates since December 2015 and has indicated it will keep doing so this year.
So if long-term rates were pushed lower by central bank bond buying, and now short-term rates are being pushed higher as the Fed tightens its monetary policy, the yield curve has nowhere to go but flatter.
“In the current environment, I think it’s a less reliable indicator than it has been in the past,” said Matthew Luzzetti, a senior economist at Deutsche Bank.
Advertisement"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "U.S. Government Bond Yields Fall After Fed Decision
Fed’s chairman did little to alter the impression that it was prepared to cut interest rates for the first time in more than a decade
Ten-year Treasury yields fell below 2% for the first time since late 2016 after the Federal Reserve stood pat on its benchmark rate but opened the door to a near-term-cut, the latest milestone in this year’s global government bond rally that has sent yields in Europe to a series of record lows.
The benchmark yield was recently at 1.981% in early Asian trading Thursday versus 2.023% late in the New York day.
U.S. government bond prices surged higher Wednesday afternoon following the Fed’s signal on rates. The 10-year yield was as high as 3.232% on Nov. 8.
For most of this year, global bond yields have been falling and prices have been rising due to concerns about global economic growth. Yields have hit record lows in a number of European markets.
As confidence in global growth ebbs and inflation expectations decline world-wide, demand for corporate and high-quality sovereign debt will continue to drive yields lower, said Rick Rieder, BlackRock Inc.’s chief investment officer for global fixed income.
“People say yields can only go so far—I think European interest rates are going to go lower,” he added, predicting the 10-year yield likely won’t stop at 2%.
Treasury yields slid immediately after the Fed released its policy statement and continued declining as Fed Chairman Jerome Powell spoke at a news conference.
Mr. Powell did little to alter the impression that the Fed was prepared to cut interest rates for the first time in more than a decade. Many investors had anticipated those signals, but they still hadn’t fully been reflected in bond prices.
Interest-rate forecasts released on Wednesday showed eight of 17 officials project the Fed will cut the benchmark federal-funds rate this year, with seven of those officials seeing two quarter-point reductions.
Fed officials in their policy statement made note of both increased uncertainty about the economic outlook and muted inflation pressures, while saying they would “act as appropriate to sustain the expansion.”
Such language helped push the yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note to 2.023%, its lowest close since Nov. 8, 2016—the day of the last presidential election—from 2.060% on Tuesday.
Yields on shorter-term bonds, which are particularly sensitive to changes in monetary policy, logged bigger declines, with the two-year yield dropping nearly 0.11 percentage point to 1.758%, its lowest close since November 2017.
“Half the committee is ready to pull the trigger on a rate cut at some point this year,” said Thomas Simons, senior vice president and money-market economist in the fixed-income group at Jefferies LLC. “Powell’s tone in his press conference to me suggested the threshold for a rate cut is not particularly far away.”
Already this year, investors had been scooping up Treasurys largely in response to slowing global growth, soft inflation data and trade tensions, which have clouded the economic outlook.
Previewing Mr. Powell’s comments, European Central Bank President Mario Draghi had signaled Tuesday that the ECB could start rolling out new stimulus measures, including a reduction to already negative interest rates.
Despite the momentum toward a rate cut, some analysts cautioned that the Fed might keep rates steady if the U.S. and China make progress on trade talks on the sidelines of next week’s Group of 20 summit in Japan.
Such a scenario in turn could push Treasury yields higher.
The WSJ Dollar Index, which measures the U.S. currency against a basket of 16 others, fell 0.4% to 90.40.
Related
- Stocks Rise as Fed Leaves Rates Unchanged
- Fed Holds Rates Steady, Hints at Possible Cuts if Outlook Dims
- Heard on the Street: Do Investors Really Want This Fed Rate Cut?
- Fed’s Bullard Voted Against Rate Decision
- Parsing the Fed: How the June Statement Changed From May
- Transcript: Fed Chairman Powell’s Postmeeting Press Conference
—Daniel Kruger contributed to this article.
Write to Sam Goldfarb at sam.goldfarb@wsj.com
Appeared in the June 20, 2019, print edition as 'U.S. Bond Yield Falls Below 2% In Asia.'
Most Popular Videos
Most Popular Articles
-
Boeing’s Latest 737 MAX Concern: Pilots’ Physical Strength
-
Opinion: Accusing the New York Times of ‘Treason,’ Trump Crosses a Line
-
The Future of Housing Rises in Phoenix
-
Afraid of Missing the Next School Shooter, One Prosecutor Charged 216 Kids. Now He’s Rethinking.
-
How 7.4 Tons of Venezuela’s Gold Landed in Africa—and Vanished"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "The financial world has been atwitter about the inversion of the yield curve. It is a phenomenon in the bond market in which longer-term interest rates fall below shorter-term interest rates, and has historically been a warning sign that a recession could be on the way.
This all seems obvious to people who are steeped in bond market math and the workings of fixed-income markets, and can be completely perplexing to those who are not.
Maybe a sports gambling analogy will make the intuition clearer.
Any adult can walk into a casino and bet on how an N.F.L. team will do this year. For example, bettors once again expect the New England Patriots to be an excellent team — that they are likely to win 11 or 12 out of their 16 games. Casinos will let you wager on how many games they will win this season.
But what if casinos not only would let you bet on how a team will do this year, but how they will perform over the next, 2, 5, 10 or even 30 years? What would you pay for a betting slip that promises, say, a $10 payout for every Patriots regular season win in the next decade?
And what if you could then sell that slip to other gamblers, with its price rising and falling as bettors’ views on the outlook for the Patriots changes? Essentially, you could take the price that people are paying for those slips with different durations, and, with some simple math, figure out how many games bettors expect the team to win each year in the future.
That’s kind of what the bond market does with interest rates. Bonds that mature at different times are always trading on global markets, and with some fairly simple math you can figure out what the price of different bonds implies about how interest rates are expected to change over the coming years.
Interest rates are closely connected to the rate of economic growth and inflation. In boom times, lots of people want to borrow money, to expand their businesses, say, or buy houses. And the Federal Reserve will raise the interest rate that it controls in order to prevent the economy from overheating, resulting in inflation. When a slowdown comes, the process works in reverse.
If you buy, say, a 90-day Treasury bill, you are likely to receive an interest rate that is closely tied to whatever the Federal Reserve has currently set as its main target for interest rates in the banking system and any changes the Fed might make in the near future.
It’s like betting on next week’s game: We know a lot about what opponent your team is facing, how well they’ve been playing, whether there are injuries that are likely to affect the outcome.
But if you buy a 10-year Treasury note, you’re making a bet on the more distant future. The economy will probably change a lot over the next decade. You can’t predict exactly what will happen, but you are betting on the general direction of things: Do you expect the economy to heat up, creating inflation pressures and causing the Fed to raise rates? Or do you expect it cool down?
So purchase of a longer-term Treasury bond is like making one of those long-term bets with a casino on how a team will perform for many years to come. You have no idea what the details are of which players they will sign or who will be coaching the team. You are betting on the general direction.
How might that bet look with two different teams?
The Arizona Cardinals were terrible last year, and most bettors expect them to be pretty bad this year as well: Vegas odds suggest they will only win five or six games. But they have drafted an exciting young quarterback (Kyler Murray) and hired a new coach.
Even if you’re not a believer in the Cardinals for this season, you could reasonably expect that they will get better in the coming years — that their future is better than their present. If most bettors believed that, you could tell that from the difference between the price of a 10-year Cardinals betting contract and a one-year Cardinals betting contract — it might reveal, for example, that the team is expected to go from winning 5 games this year to 9 games two or three years from now.
Or consider the Patriots. They have been the best team in the game for the past two decades, but their quarterback, Tom Brady, is 42 years old, and their coach, Bill Belichick, is 67. It would be reasonable to expect the team to decline over the next decade after these stars retire.
The prices of the Patriots one-year contract, in other words, would probably reflect greater optimism than their 10-year contract.
Essentially, the relative prices of those short-term versus long-term betting contracts would tell you whether a team is viewed as likely to be on the upswing or the downswing — not necessarily today but at some point in the next few years.
That’s exactly what the yield curve is doing: It is telling us the difference between shorter-term and longer-term interest rates, and hence whether investors expect the economy to get better or worse in the years ahead. Our fictional Patriots yield curve is inverted, and so is the actual United States Treasury bond yield curve.
[Here’s more about the yield curve and the 3-D rendering that appears with this article.]
The moves in the bond market over the last nine months and especially the last couple of weeks are the equivalent of what would happen if Mr. Brady and Mr. Belichick both announced that this would be their last season before retiring. The current outlook remains stable, but the outlook for the coming decade has gotten worse.
Longer-term rates below shorter term rates are a clear signal from bond investors that they think the United States economy is on the downswing — that its future looks worse than its present.
It’s the opposite of times like 2009, when the economy was in recession and the yield curve pointed to future improvement. At those moments, the United States more resembled the Cardinals, a bad team but with room to improve in the coming years and (potentially) the tools to do it.
The good news is that this is merely the best guess of investors with trillions of dollars on the line. It could be wrong. Maybe the Patriots will pluck another Brady-esque quarterback in the draft, Mr. Belichick will coach until he is 80, and the team will remain a perennial Super Bowl contender. Market prices can be wrong!
And similarly, maybe the negative signals about the global economy will turn out to be overdone, and the United States economy will continue improving despite what the yield curve is suggesting now.
A lot of surprising things can happen in one N.F.L. season, let alone across years of them. That’s even more true for the global economy."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Stock markets tanked Wednesday after the bond market sounded a loud warning that the U.S. economy might be headed toward a recession.
Investors are spooked by a scenario known as the “inverted yield curve,” which occurs when the interest rates on short-term bonds are higher than the interest rates paid by long-term bonds. What it means is that people are so worried about the near-term future that they are piling into safer long-term investments.
In a healthy economy, bondholders typically demand to be paid more — or receive a higher “yield” — on longer-term bonds than they do for short-term bonds. That’s because longer term bonds require people to lock their money up for a greater period of time — and investors want to be compensated for that risk. In contrast, bonds that require investors to make shorter time commitments, say for three months, don’t require as much sacrifice and usually pay less.
Just think about the deposits in your bank account, which are in many ways a loan to the bank. You can withdraw that money at any time, so the bank doesn’t pay you a high interest rate. By comparison, if you lock up your money in the bank for a year or longer, you’ll get higher rates. The bond market works similarly: The longer you lend your money, the higher return you’ll get.
For U.S. government securities — known as Treasury bonds — that relationship has now turned upside down. On Wednesday morning, the yield on the 10-year Treasury temporarily fell below the yield on the two-year Treasury for the first time since 2007. (It later recovered slightly.)
The following chart shows the difference in yield between the two-year Treasury bond and Treasury bonds of other duration. Bonds of longer duration should have higher yield, but as you can see, it has dipped below for several longer-term bonds.
Other parts of the yield curve have been inverted for a few months. For instance, three-month Treasurys have been yielding more than 10-year Treasurys since late May. The gap became more dramatic Wednesday, with three-month Treasurys paying nearly 0.4 percentage points more than 10-year Treasurys as of midafternoon, greater than the 0.1 percent difference seen in late May.
The more pronounced inversion is a sign that people are more concerned about the fallout of the trade war between the U.S. and China and worried by signs that economic growth may be slowing around the globe.
[Stocks losses deepen as a key recession warning surfaces]
So why do investors care?
The yield curve has inverted before every U.S. recession since 1955, although it sometimes happens months or years before the recession starts. Because of that link, substantial and long-lasting inversions of the yield curve are largely viewed as a strong predictor that a downturn is on the way.
Two researchers for the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco summed it up in a letter they published last year. “Forecasting future economic developments is a tricky business, but the [yield curve] has a strikingly accurate record for forecasting recessions,” they wrote. “Periods with an inverted yield curve are reliably followed by economic slowdowns and almost always by a recession.”
The fact that people are willing to take such little money for their long-term bonds suggests that they aren’t too worried about inflation, says Brian Rehling, co-head of global fixed income strategy for the Wells Fargo Investment Institute. If they aren’t too worried about inflation, it also suggests that they expect the economy to grow more slowly in the future, he says. Inflation usually picks up when the economy is hot.
“Essentially, investors are saying, ‘We’re worried about economic weakness,’ ” Rehling said.
[Banks are paying people to borrow money. That’s alarming news for the global economy.]
The yield curve inversion also suggests that investors expect the Federal Reserve to keep cutting short-term interest rates in an effort to boost the economy, Rehling says.
Fed officials cut the benchmark interest rate by 0.25 percentage points last month, the first rate cut since December 2008. Investors are now expecting the Fed to cut rates by another 0.25 percentage points during its next meeting in September.
There are reasons to have hope the economy won’t go into a recession. The labor market is strong, and most people who want a job are able to get one. Consumers are still opening up their wallets, which is lifting economic growth.
Even if the shift in the yield curve is followed by a recession, the slowdown might not happen right away. A look back at previous downturns shows that yields have typically inverted an average of 18 months before the start of the recession.
Andrew Van Dam contributed to this report."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Advertisement
Supported by
What the Bond Market Is Telling Us About the Biden Economy
A recent rise in interest rates hints that a recovery is on the way, but it could also mean harder choices ahead on spending.
While Washington debates the size of a new economic rescue plan, the bond market is sending a message: A meaningful acceleration in both growth and inflation in the years ahead looks more likely now than it did just a few weeks ago.
That would be mostly good news, suggesting an economy recovering quickly from the pandemic. Interest rates remain very low by historical standards, even for the longest-term securities. Bond prices imply that inflation will be consistent with the Federal Reserve’s target of 2 percent annual rises in consumer prices, not a more worrisome spiral.
But the surge in rates has brought an end to a period of several months when borrowing was essentially free, seemingly far into the future. For the Biden administration and the Federal Reserve, that implies that the free-lunch stage of the crisis is ending, and there could be harder questions ahead.
In particular, it means that the downside of bad policy — federal spending that doesn’t generate much economic activity, for example — is higher than it was as recently as December.
“We’re at a place where the markets are starting to grapple with the question of whether there are trade-offs between more stimulus today and potentially higher rates and more inflation down the road,” said Nathan Sheets, chief economist of PGIM Fixed Income and a former official at the Treasury and the Fed.
The yield on 10-year Treasury bonds — the rate the United States government must pay to borrow money for a decade — was 1.37 percent Monday, low by historical standards but well above its recent low of 0.51 percent in August and 0.92 percent at the end of December. Those higher Treasury rates generally translate into higher mortgage rates and corporate borrowing costs, so the surge could take some of the air out of bubbly housing and financial markets.
The inflation-adjusted interest rate the United States Treasury must pay to borrow money for 30 years was negative for much of the last year, meaning the government would pay investors back less in inflation-adjusted terms than it borrowed. Last week, the rate rose into positive territory for the first time since June and closed at 0.06 percent Monday. (For shorter time horizons, the “real yield” remains in negative territory.)
That’s particularly striking given that Fed officials have repeatedly said they expect the short-term interest rate target they control to be near zero for quite some time — and bond investors appear to believe them. The yield on two-year Treasuries has barely budged in the same span.
What is happening is known as a “steepening of the yield curve,” with long-term rates rising as short-term rates hold still. It tends to presage faster economic growth; it is the opposite of a “yield curve inversion,” which is known as a harbinger of recessions.
But the flip side is that the moment appears to have passed when bond markets were giving the government an all-clear signal to do whatever was necessary to boost the economy, essentially making endless funding available at extraordinarily low cost. That could have implications for how the Biden administration approaches the rest of its economic agenda.
Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen has emphasized that low interest rates, which keep the cost of debt service low, are important in her thinking about how much the government can comfortably borrow and spend.
At The New York Times’s DealBook conference on Monday, Ms. Yellen, after noting that the government’s ratio of debt to the size of the economy is much larger than it was before the global financial crisis, said: “Look at a different metric, which is more important, which is what is the cost of that debt. Look for example at interest payments on the debt as a share of G.D.P.,” which is below 2007 levels.
“So I think we have more fiscal space than we used to because of the interest rate environment,” Ms. Yellen told the Times’s Andrew Ross Sorkin.
By implication, the further that bond yields rise, and inflation expectations along with them, the more the Biden administration would view their potential spending to be constrained. Congress is now at work on a $1.9 trillion pandemic aid package, which Democratic leaders hope to pass in March. They envision a large-scale infrastructure plan after that.
Jerome Powell, the Federal Reserve chair, will face questions from Congress on Tuesday about the central bank’s policies. In other recent appearances, he has emphasized the importance of returning the economy to full health above all other goals, and stressed that inflation has been persistently too low rather than too high over the last decade.
“Fed Chair Powell has taken each and every opportunity to reassure investors that the Fed would consider near-term inflationary pressure to be transitory,” said Katie Nixon, chief investment officer at Northern Trust Wealth Management. “The market is taking the Fed at its word that short rates will be anchored at zero for a considerable time.”
The gap between the prices of regular and inflation-protected bonds as of Friday’s close imply that the Consumer Price Index is expected to rise 2.29 percent a year over the next five years, and 1.99 percent a year for the five years after that. The Fed aims for 2 percent annual inflation as measured by a different index that tends to be somewhat lower, meaning these so-called “inflation break-evens” are broadly consistent with the central bank’s goals.
Put it all together, and the surge in rates so far is basically an optimistic sign that the post-pandemic economy will mark the end of a long period of sluggish growth. But the speed of the adjustment is a reminder that the line between too hot and just right is a narrow one.
Advertisement"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "The economy got off to an even weaker start this year than first thought, the government reported Friday, as economic activity contracted amid a disappointing trade picture and continued caution on spending by businesses and consumers alike.
The 0.7 percent decline in economic output in the first quarter of 2015 was a reversal of the initial 0.2 percent advance for the period reported last month by the Commerce Department.
While statistical quirks and one-time factors like wintry weather in some parts of the country played a role, as did a work slowdown at West Coast ports, the lackluster report for January, February and March underscores the American economy’s seeming inability to generate much momentum.
Much of the revision was spurred by fresh data showing businesses added to inventories at a slower pace than first estimated, while net exports fell slightly more than first thought. A sharp pullback in energy exploration in the wake of falling oil prices is also putting pressure on business investment.
Most experts had expected Friday’s data to show a contraction in the first quarter, and virtually no mainstream economists believe the country is on the verge of a recession. Still, the weakness is a reason the Federal Reserve is not expected to raise short-term interest rates until the second half of 2015, after speculation that a June increase was possible.
Consumers, who generate roughly two-thirds of growth, have also been less willing to open their wallets, despite the windfall provided by lower gasoline prices. Personal consumption rose by 1.8 percent last quarter, down from 4.4 percent in late 2014.
After the economy grew at an annual rate of nearly 5 percent in the spring and summer of 2014, some experts concluded that the economy had found its footing and predicted that a healthier, sustained growth rate of near 3 percent was finally at hand.
The new data for the first quarter, and signs of only a tepid rebound in the current, second quarter of 2015, are now forcing some economists to rethink earlier assumptions.
“This isn’t the off-to-the-races kind of expansion we envisioned six months ago,” said Scott Anderson, chief economist at Bank of the West in San Francisco. “More and more folks are coming around to the view that the long-term growth rate of the American economy is 2 percent, at best. We can’t sustain 3 or 4 percent growth for very long, so it’s two steps forward, one step back.”
While cloudy, the economic outlook is not necessarily dark.
Unemployment has been falling steadily, and experts think it could fall to about 5 percent by the end of the year, from 5.4 percent now. The jobless rate stood at 8 percent a little over two years ago.
The real estate market has also been robust as of late, with a measure of pending home sales last month hitting a nine-year high, according to data released Thursday by the National Association of Realtors. New-home sales and construction were also strong in April.
Indeed, an upward revision in residential construction last quarter actually offset some of the weakness elsewhere.
And experts say some of the weakness in the first quarter of the year reflects how the numbers are crunched by government statisticians to account for seasonal variations, like the retail slowdown that follows the holiday shopping season or less business activity as temperatures plunge.
That process, known as seasonal adjustment, may indeed have exaggerated the underlying weakness last quarter, according to an analysis by private economists at firms like Barclays and Macroeconomic Advisers, as well as at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. In first quarter of 2014, the winter slowdown was even more pronounced, with the economy contracting at an annual rate of 2.1 percent.
Whatever role seasonal adjustments did play, Mr. Anderson cautions against dismissing the first quarter weakness as a statistical quirk.
“Some economists have been trying to explain away the negative numbers,” he said.. “I don’t think it’s so easily dismissed. We will get a modest bounce back this quarter.”
In particular, he said, the dollar’s surge against foreign currencies like the euro is hurting manufacturers and other exporters, a trend likely to continue even with the resolution of the West Coast port slowdown.
Although he expects the annual rate of growth to rebound to above 2 percent this quarter and to about 3 percent in the second half of 2015, that still leaves his estimate at 2.2 percent for the annual growth rate for the year. Last year, the economy grew at an annual rate of 2.4 percent.
“There’s some truth to the statistical issues and the one-time factors, but we are still left with a real deceleration,” Mr. Anderson said. “Two percent is probably where the economy will gravitate longer term.”"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "A bombshell report released Wednesday by the majority staff of the Senate Homeland Security Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations revealed that the Obama administration secretly plotted to give Iran access to the U.S. financial system as a sweetener for the 2015 nuclear deal.
This effectively helped Iran evade sanctions that were not lifted as part of the JCPOA, as it is formally known. The report also details how Obama officials blatantly lied to Congress and the American people about this special arrangement.
The Senate report cites four occasions when Obama officials “publicly stated that Iranian access to the U.S. financial system was not part of the relief specified in the JCPOA,” detailed as follows:
First, on July 23, 2015, U.S. Treasury Secretary Jack Lew testified before the U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations concerning the nature of the potential sanctions relief contained in the JCPOA. Secretary Lew stated that the JCPOA would “suspend nuclear-related secondary sanctions,” but that “a number of key sanctions will remain in place.” Specifically, Secretary Lew explained that “Iranian banks will not be able to clear U.S. dollars through New York, hold correspondent account relationships with U.S. financial institutions, or enter into financing arrangements with U.S. banks.” He further testified that “Iran, in other words, will continue to be denied access to the world’s largest financial and commercial market.”
Second, on August 5, 2015, Adam Szubin, the Acting Under Secretary of the Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence, testified before the U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs that “Iran will be denied access to the world’s most important market and unable to deal in the world’s most important currency,” referring to the U.S. financial system and the U.S. dollar. He also stated that “Iranian banks will not be able to clear U.S. dollars through New York, hold correspondent account relationships with U.S. financial institutions, or enter into financing arrangements with U.S. banks.”
Third, in testimony before the U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs on September 17, 2015, Mr. Szubin again assured lawmakers that “no Iranian banks can access the U.S. financial system, not to open an account, not to purchase a security, and not even to execute a dollarized transaction where a split–second’s worth of business is done in a New York clearing bank.”
Fourth, on September 16, 2015, Mr. Szubin gave a public address to the Washington Institute for Near East Policy where he discussed the sanctions that would remain after Implementation Day.
There, Mr. Szubin stated: “Iran will not be able to open bank accounts with U.S. banks, nor will Iran be able to access the U.S. banking sector, even for that momentary transaction to, what we call, dollarize a foreign payment. … That is not in the cards. That is not part of the relief offered under the JCPOA.”
Both Secretary Lew and Mr. Szubin testified that Iran would not have access to the U.S. financial system. This public testimony mirrored what OFAC and State Department officials told foreign financial institutions and other investors around the world, as detailed in the following section.
The Senate report goes on to discuss the “roadshows” held by Obama administration officials for foreign governments and investors, explaining how sanctions relief under the JCPOA would work. It was repeatedly stated in these roadshows that “the U.S. financial system remained off-limits for foreign financial institutions conducting business on behalf of Iran.”
“U.S. government officials repeated this particular advice – to not use the U.S. financial system for transactions involving Iran – multiple times to bankers and business development leaders in countries including Switzerland, England, and Germany,” the Senate report notes.
At the same time, the roadshows featured a good deal of nudging and winking to the effect that the Obama administration would not vigorously pursue violations that favored Iran. At one of the most important roadshows in London, a Treasury official said violations would be addressed with simple warning letters “95 percent of the time.”
Despite these assurances, the Obama plan to convert $5.7 billion in currency to U.S. dollars fell apart because the two American banks asked to handle the transaction refused the request.
“The Obama administration misled the American people and Congress because they were desperate to get a deal with Iran. Despite claims both before and after the Iran deal was completed that the U.S. financial system would remain off limits, the Obama administration issued a specific license allowing Iran to convert billions of dollars in assets using the U.S. financial system,” subcommittee chairman Sen. Rob Portman (R-OH) said on Wednesday.
Portman added that the report includes a number of transparency recommendations to “ensure these secret side deals never happen again.”
."
frame of article is: government
###
article: "Scramble to safety upends bets by investors who were convinced three-decade-long rally in Treasurys was over

Updated Aug. 23, 2015 2:10 pm ET

Fresh jitters about the global economy are giving U.S. government bonds an unexpected boost, once again upending bets by investors who were convinced the three-decade-long rally in Treasurys was over.

The scramble for the safety of Treasurys—amid broader financial-market turmoil spurred by worries about the slowdown in China—has sent the yield on the benchmark 10-year note back toward 2%, its lowest since April. Many traders and investors say it is likely to pierce that level if concerns persist.

It is the latest setback for bond bears, who since the financial crisis have repeatedly called for Treasury prices to fall and yields to rise and have repeatedly been wrong. But some investors have profited after betting that uncertainty about the growth outlook and subdued inflation would keep demand for Treasurys high and yields low.

On Friday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average entered a correction, roughly defined as a drop of 10% from a recent peak, capping a tumultuous week in which global stock markets slumped and many emerging-market currencies hit record lows against the dollar. U.S. crude oil dipped below $40 a barrel for the first time since 2009, reviving worries about low inflation. The broad selloff in risk assets followed China’s decision to devalue its currency, triggering the yuan’s biggest fall in two decades.

The volatility has cast doubt on the Federal Reserve’s willingness to raise interest rates at its September meeting, a threat that has hung over the $12.8 trillion Treasury market. Higher rates make existing bonds less attractive.

“If at the beginning of the year, you told anyone that the Fed would be 50/50 about raising rates at their next meeting and the 10-year yield was approaching 2%, they would think you were nuts,’’ said Antonin Cronin, a Treasury bond trader at Société Générale SA.

Stubbornly low government-bond yields world-wide underscore soft global demand for goods and services as many countries have grappled with aging populations, falling productivity and restrained borrowing and lending since the financial crisis.

Treasury bonds maturing in 10 to 30 years have handed investors a total return, which reflects changes in price as well as interest payments, of 3.2% this month through Friday, according to Barclays PLC. Taking dividends into account, the S&P 500 lost 6.1% in the period, according to FactSet. Year-to-date, long-term Treasurys have returned 1.8% compared with negative 3% for the S&P 500. The last time bonds outperformed stocks over a full year was 2011.

“Bond bears have misread economic growth. They have misread inflation data,’’ said Bob Andres, founder and chief investment officer of Andres Capital Management, which oversees more than $100 million in assets. “I think the U.S. economy will be in a slow-growth mode for longer than most observers believe.”

On Friday, the yield on the 10-year Treasury, a benchmark that guides borrowing costs for consumers, companies and governments, dropped to 2.052% from 2.084% on Thursday. The 10-year yield hit its 2015 peak of 2.5% in June, and started the year at 2.173%. Yields fall when bond prices rise.

Zhiwei Ren, portfolio manager at Penn Mutual Asset Management Inc., began wagering against U.S. government bonds at the start of the year. The bet at first paid off but then began to sour earlier this summer as a flare-up in the Greek debt crisis and a selloff in Chinese stocks drove investors into Treasurys. Mr. Ren, whose firm manages $20 billion in assets, got out in July, when the 10-year yield was 2.3%.

“I felt like it was risky staying in the crowd and fighting against the bond market,” said Mr. Ren. “The lower the yields go, the bigger you are going to suffer in terms of performance. It was time to get out.”

It isn’t the first time bearish bond investors have come away disappointed. In 2013, yields jumped as the Fed prepared to rein in its bond-buying program amid a strengthening U.S. economy. But yields fell again last year amid expectations that central banks in Europe and Japan would pursue easing measures to stoke growth. The Bank of Japan expanded its stimulus measures in October 2014, while the European Central Bank began purchases in March.

Earlier this year, betting on higher bonds yields seemed like the sensible move for many investors. The pace of U.S. economic growth had picked up after hitting a soft patch, and a solid jobs market bolstered the case for the Fed to start raising rates for the first time since 2006 sometime this year.

In recent weeks, though, many money managers who had less money allocated to Treasurys than suggested by benchmark indexes have bought bonds to come back in line, according to traders. Some investors who bet against Treasurys by going short had to scoop up bonds to close out their position, contributing to the buying pressure.

“If you have been shorting the bond market, you have been destroyed,” said Charles Comiskey, head of Treasury trading at Bank of Nova Scotia in New York. ”For those who were long the market, you have made a killing.”

To be sure, some investors are skeptical that there is much more room for the 10-year yield to fall. If policy makers take actions to soothe investors’ fears about markets and growth, demand for haven assets could wane, sending yields higher. On Sunday, the The Wall Street Journal reported that China’s central bank is preparing to bolster liquidity in the country’s banking system.

Ashish Shah, head of global credit at AllianceBernstein, which has $486 billion in assets under management, has added Treasury bonds to his portfolio in recent months but is now leaning toward selling to book profits.

Bets on long-term Treasury bonds have been particularly lucrative. John Bellows, portfolio manager at Western Asset Management Co., which has $452.5 billion in assets under management, started to buy long-term Treasury bonds before the 10-year yield hit this year’s peak of 2.5% in June. For many, that seemed a risky move, because the consensus at that time was that the yield would continue to march toward 3%. But he believes the yields can’t go steadily higher because inflation is nearly “nonexistent.”

Inflation erodes bonds’ value over time. Long-term bonds are vulnerable to changing views on inflation, while short-term bonds are more sensitive to shifts in the outlook on the Fed’s rate policy.

“It has been profitable,’’ Mr. Bellows said of the bet, but he declined to disclose how much he made. “Many feared at that time yields are going to keep rising. But without inflation, it is hard for yields to rise sustainably.”

Write to Min Zeng at min.zeng@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Government-bond selloff causes ripple through financial markets

Updated Sept. 12, 2016 7:06 pm ET

The selloff may have fizzled out, but it was enough to put markets on notice.

Investors now are asking whether markets are on the verge of another bond-market “tantrum,” in which yields rise sharply as prices fall. So far, most conclude the risk remains low, on expectations that weak growth and inflation will mean central banks continue to deliver aggressive stimulus.

But the steep declines that escalated Friday and resumed in early trading Monday were a signal that more volatility could loom.

The Dow industrials rebounded 239.62 points Monday, and yields on benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasurys stabilized, after Federal Reserve governor Lael Brainard argued for a cautious approach to raising rates. The comments helped ease fears of higher interest rates sparked by another Fed official Friday.

The quick back-and-forth showed how leveraged the market has become to continued largess from central banks. Concerns about whether that support will continue have hit the bond market, where investors pushed yields on government debt in several countries into negative territory over the summer—meaning they were paying more for bonds than they would ultimately get back.

“Nobody has been buying on fundamentals, but on technicals,” said Mark Dowding, co-head of investment-grade at BlueBay Asset Management. “And the dominant technical has been central banks being massive buyers of assets.”

The yield on the 10-year German government bond touched a high of 0.057% Monday morning, according to Tradeweb, and finished at 0.037%, its highest close since late June when the U.K.’s vote to leave the European Union triggered a rush to safety. In Japan, yields on the 10-year government bond hovered just below zero, up from a low of minus-0.29% in late July. In the U.S., the 10-year Treasury yield was unchanged at 1.671%.

The Stoxx Europe 600 index declined 1%, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng Index skidded 3.4% and Japan’s Nikkei Stock Average fell 1.7%.

The increase in government-bond yields reverses only a portion of the tremendous drop recorded in recent years. Central banks have fueled that rally by keeping interest rates at record lows, or knocking them into negative territory, and in some cases launching huge bond-buying programs. At the start of 2016, yields in the U.S., U.K., Germany and Japan all were higher than they are today.

The recent selloff started Thursday after European Central Bank President Mario Draghi declined to commit to extending the bank’s €80 billion ($89.9 billion) in monthly asset purchases, which are slated to end in March 2017.

Investors also are concerned that the Bank of Japan is nearing the limit of its bond-buying program and may reduce its purchases of the country’s long-dated government debt.

That has upended a conviction that has shaped financial markets over the past two years: that central banks would keep on easing monetary policy.

Investors are looking at past tantrums for clues to how this selloff may play out.

Sovereign bonds around the world also fell sharply in the spring of 2015. The yield on the 10-year German bund rose from just above zero that April to just below 1% that June, as prices plunged.

That selloff wasn’t driven by any particular market event or signs of a meaningful economic reversal. Yields soon began to fall again.

While the increase in yields this time around has been smaller so far, investors do expect it to continue. Francesco Garzarelli, co-head of global macro and markets research at Goldman Sachs Group Inc., predicts the 10-year Treasury yield will rise to 2% by the end of the year. BlueBay’s Mr. Dowding said 10-year German yields could rise an additional 0.2 to 0.3 percentage point.

“In relation to expectations for the economy, these bond yields are very low,” Mr. Garzarelli said. “We’ve now passed the most extreme valuation levels, but we’re still at levels that look quite dire relative to the macro outlook.”

But many investors don’t expect the sort of big move in yields that happened in the spring last year. That is because the factors that have encouraged central banks to act—slow growth and low inflation—haven’t gone away, particularly in the eurozone and Japan. Central-bank bond buying is aimed at boosting growth and inflation by driving down bond yields and pushing investors into riskier assets, and by prodding banks into lending more.

“Broadly speaking, we’re still dealing with the same underlying fundamentals, and that’s not likely to change,” said Charlie Diebel, head of interest rates at Aviva Investors.

“Skepticism over the effectiveness of [quantitative easing] is more entrenched this year, and wage inflation is simply not coming through,” added Jack Kelly, an investment director at Standard Life Investments.

Write to Christopher Whittall at christopher.whittall@wsj.com and Mike Bird at Mike. Bird@wsj.com

Corrections & Amplifications: The yield on the 10-year German government bond touched a high of 0.057% on Monday morning and finished at 0.037%. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said the bond’s yield touched a high of 0.57% and closed at 0.37%. (Sept. 12, 2016)

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8

Appeared in the September 13, 2016, print edition as 'Yield Jump Stirs Up New ‘Tantrum’ Fear'."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Despite pressure from the White House, House GOP leaders determined Thursday night that they don’t have the votes to pass a rewrite of the Affordable Care Act and will not seek to put their proposal on the floor on Friday.
A late push to act on health care had threatened the bipartisan deal to keep the government open for one week while lawmakers crafted a longer-term spending deal. Now, lawmakers are likely to approve the spending bill when it comes to the floor Friday and keep the government open past midnight.
The failure of GOP leaders to summon enough support for a renewed health-care push is evidence of just how difficult it is to overhaul Obamacare, despite seven years of GOP promises to repeal and replace the 2010 law. Conservatives and moderates have repeatedly clashed over what legislation should look like, most sharply over bringing down insurance premiums in exchange for sharply limiting what kind of coverage is required to be offered.
Up to 15 or so House Republicans have publicly said they would not support the latest draft of the measure, leaving House Speaker Paul D. Ryan (R-Wis.) and the White House an incredibly narrow path to a simple majority. If all 238 Republicans are present for a vote, Ryan can lose only 22 Republicans and still pass the bill with the barest of majorities.
GOP leaders’ failure to secure a health-care deal will help ensure the government stays open past midnight on Friday — at least for one week. Lawmakers agreed to the stopgap measure so they could finish negotiating a broader deal to fund the government through September. Republicans have stated that they need Democratic support to pass the long-term spending measure, which they expect to consider next week.
The Senate stands ready to approve a one-week spending measure, but only once the broader spending agreement is complete. Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) on Thursday blocked a measure that Republican leaders hoped would allow the Senate to approve the stopgap budget without a formal vote. Schumer has indicated that he will drop his objections once he is assured a long-term budget agreement is in place, according to Senate Democratic aides.
Senators in both parties told reporters they were instructed not to leave Washington on Thursday night.
“Instead of rushing through health care,” Schumer told reporters, “they first ought to get the government funded for a full year — plain and simple.”
The frenzy of activity behind closed doors Thursday was largely driven by White House officials who were eager to see a vote on the measure ahead of the 100-day mark for President Trump while congressional leaders in both parties were more focused this week on a spending agreement, according to multiple people involved in the discussions who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not allowed to speak publicly.
The White House tried to jump-start talks on health care after House Republicans failed to pass a previous attempt at an ACA rewrite at the end of March. This week, the hard line House Freedom Caucus announced it was behind a tweaked proposal it had crafted with the White House and a leading moderate lawmaker.
But Democrats fiercely oppose any effort to change the ACA and threatened to pull their support from the short-term bill if Republicans moved forward with that effort.
“If Republicans pursue this partisan path of forcing Americans to pay more for less and destabilizing our county’s health-care system,” said House Minority Whip Steny H. Hoyer (D-Md.), then “Republicans should be prepared to [keep the government open] on their own.”
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) told a meeting of Democratic whips on Thursday that she had called Ryan and told him there were two conditions for Democratic support of the short-term funding bill, according to aides in the room. Democrats would only sign off on the emergency spending measure to allow lawmakers time to pass the longer-term spending deal, and they would not back the measure if doing so would allow Ryan time to set up a vote on a GOP rewrite of the Affordable Care Act. Democrats fiercely oppose replacing the law.
The sudden turmoil is yet another sign of Congress’s inability to meet deadlines for its most basic function: keeping the government’s lights on. And it presages fights between Congress, the White House and both parties over spending priorities, despite the one-party rule that gave some observers hope that the gridlock would cease.
Trump weighed into the spending wars on Thursday morning, indicating it was Democrats who bore the blame for shutdown threats because the party was focused on “bailing out insurance companies” while the president wants to “rebuild our military and secure our border.”
But it was Republicans who this week jettisoned Trump’s top priority — money for his proposed wall along the U.S.-Mexico border — because of widespread agreement that it should not be tied to the spending deal. Trump has also agreed to pay the cost-sharing subsidies for low-income people who get their insurance under the ACA — something he threatened to withhold if he did not get money for the wall.
Ryan on Thursday also blamed Democrats for “dragging their feet” on negotiations in an apparent preparation to blame Democrats if their deal falls through.
“I would be shocked if they would want to see a government shutdown, that the Democrats would want to do that,” Ryan told reporters at his weekly press briefing. “The reason this government funding bill is not ready is because Democrats have been dragging their feet.”
The standoff is the first in what could be several budget battles between Congress and the White House this year. Trump has called for massive hikes to defense spending and harsh cuts to domestic agencies in his 2018 budget, a proposal that many Republicans have rejected out of hand. He is also likely to revive calls for money to begin constructing the border wall — which by some estimates would cost as much as $21 billion — in future budget negotiations.
Ryan and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) were forced to negotiate with Democrats on the budget after it became clear that Republicans lacked enough votes to pass a long-term spending bill on their own. As a result, the GOP leaders have had the uncomfortable task of writing a measure that ignores nearly all of Trump’s priorities, including money for the border wall.
Schumer also sought to refocus blame on the GOP, arguing that the only thing standing in the way of a long-term agreement was Trump himself. Congressional leaders were nearing a final deal several weeks ago, but the talks were derailed when Office of Management and budget director Mick Mulvaney announced that Trump would demand that money for the border wall be included in the funding bill.
“Unfortunately the president stood in the way for quite a long time,” Schumer said. “That’s why we’re a little delayed.”
Congressional leaders had hoped to finalize a spending deal by midweek, but the talks were stuck on a small number of unrelated policy provisions, known as riders. Democrats complained that GOP leaders were trying to use the spending bill to cut abortion access and scale back Wall Street reforms passed under President Barack Obama.
Pelosi accused Republicans of complicating the negotiations with unnecessary demands.
“They’re mixing apples and oranges here,” Pelosi said at a weekly news conference. “They are making matters worse.”
Republicans have lodged similar complaints about Democrats’ demands for an extension of health-care benefits for miners and money to help Puerto Rico continue making Medicaid payments that were subsidized under Obamacare.
Trump criticized the demand in his Thursday morning tweetstorm as a bailout for insurance companies in Puerto Rico, a criticism repeated later in the day by White House press secretary Sean Spicer.
Spicer said Democrats have shifted their demands as the spending negotiations wear on.
“They keep moving the goal post,” Spicer said. “The issue right now is to make sure that we do what’s in the best interest of this country and our people by keeping the government open.”
The continued fighting comes despite signs of agreement Wednesday when Trump announced plans to continue cost-sharing payments under the ACA.
Republicans have not indicated how they plan to handle the policy provisions, but most GOP negotiators said they were pleased with the direction of the negotiations.
The long-term spending bill is expected to include several White House priorities, such as increases in funding for border security and defense spending, including an unspecified amount to repair fencing and new surveillance technology to patrol the nearly 2,000-mile border, the aides said. Democrats have said they support increased border security as long as no money goes toward building a physical wall.
Robert Costa and Ed O’Keefe contributed to this report."
frame of article is: government
###
article: "In the United States, deaths have fallen by about 10 percent in the past week. New deaths worldwide have also decreased in recent weeks, although the number of new cases has increased slightly.
Here are some significant developments:
Sign up for our coronavirus newsletter | Mapping the spread of the coronavirus: Across the U.S. | Worldwide | Vaccine tracker
Canada becomes the latest country to green-light mixing coronavirus vaccines
A Canadian panel of scientists said Tuesday that people who received a first dose of AstraZeneca’s coronavirus vaccine can choose to receive their second dose from Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna, joining several European countries that have adopted similar guidance.
Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization said it considered the risk of rare but serious blood clots associated with AstraZeneca’s vaccine when making the decision. Howard Njoo, the nation’s deputy chief public health officer, said officials wanted to give people enough information to “make an informed decision.”
As of May 12, roughly 1 in 83,000 people in Canada who had received a first dose of the AstraZeneca vaccine experienced clotting, according to the country’s public health agency, though it said the rate could be as high as 1 in 55,000.
The scientific panel, whose advice is nonbinding, also said people who received an mRNA vaccine, including those from Pfizer and Moderna, should be offered a vaccine from the same company for their second doses unless it’s not readily available.
Nearly 58 percent of Canadians have received a first dose of a coronavirus vaccine, but only 5.5 percent of people have been fully vaccinated.
Doctors prepare to ration care as covid surge leaves Malaysia in ‘total lockdown’
Coronavirus cases are soaring. Hospitals are growing crowded. And officials are warning that doctors may soon have to decide who lives.
While India’s covid-19 crisis is far from over, the number of new coronavirus infections per million people in Malaysia has overtaken that of the more populous South Asian country. Malaysia, with its roughly 32 million people, now registers more new cases per capita than any medium- or large-sized country in Asia, according to Our World in Data, which tracks publicly available figures.
Facing a record number of new cases, Malaysia’s prime minister announced a two-week “total lockdown” starting Tuesday.
“There is no time to lose,” wrote one local columnist. “We are staring at the abyss.”
U.K. reports no new covid-19 deaths for first time since March 2020
Britain on Tuesday announced no new deaths from covid-19 within 28 days of a positive test for the first time since March 2020 amid an aggressive national vaccination campaign.
The news comes with the caveat that Monday was a British bank holiday, which may have delayed reporting new fatalities. The country’s number of reported infections also has risen in the past few weeks, and health officials urged continued caution.
“The vaccines are clearly working — protecting you, those around you and your loved ones,” U.K. Health Secretary Matt Hancock told reporters. “But despite this undoubtedly good news, we know we haven’t beaten this virus yet, and with cases continuing to rise please remember hands, face, space and let in fresh air when indoors, and of course make sure when you can you get both jabs.”
Britain has one of the world’s highest coronavirus vaccination rates, with about 59 percent of its population at least partially vaccinated. By comparison, roughly 51 percent of the U.S. population has gotten at least one dose of a vaccine.
WHO renames coronavirus variants with ‘non-stigmatizing’ Greek letters
Say goodbye to the “Indian,” “South African” and “British” coronavirus variants.
According to the World Health Organization, they’re the Delta, Beta and Alpha variants now.
The global health body unveiled its new naming system Monday, saying that it would use letters from the Greek alphabet as “non-stigmatizing labels” for new variants.
The WHO’s guidance is intended for the general public: Scientists will continue using traditional (and highly technical) naming conventions. Those names haven’t fully caught on in the wider discourse because nonscientists can easily get tripped up when trying to remember the difference between the B.1.1.7 strand, which was first detected in Britain, or the B.1.617.2 variant initially documented in India.
Greek letters are easier to pronounce and “more practical to be discussed by non-scientific audiences,” the WHO said in its announcement.
All White House staff to return to work on campus in July
All White House staff will return to work on campus in July as the Biden administration continues to phase out remote working prompted by the coronavirus pandemic.
The timeline was outlined in an email sent to White House personnel Tuesday morning from the White House Office of Management and Administration. According to the email, obtained by The Washington Post, all aides at the White House and in the Office of the Vice President currently working remotely will return to the White House campus between July 6 and July 23.
The directive does not apply to employees who work elsewhere in the Executive Office of the President, who will return at an undetermined later time, according to the email, which was first reported by Axios.
The White House is making exceptions for personnel with “an extenuating circumstance that makes working in person not possible” and allowing them to work remotely “until those circumstances change,” according to the email. The transition for staff also require some shuffling for White House aides who have already been reporting to work in-person. The email notes that personnel working out of the Eisenhower Executive Office Building may be asked to move to a new permanent seat.
“In order to welcome all staff back to campus, we must maximize our EEOB office space, and this requires rearranging some offices and desk assignments,” the email read.
Sinovac earns WHO approval as vaccine gets boost from Brazilian study
The WHO announced Tuesday that it had authorized the China-developed Sinovac vaccine for emergency use as a new study suggests that the vaccine may be more effective at preventing symptomatic infection and death from covid-19 than expected.
Deaths fell by 95 percent in Serrana, a town in the covid-ravaged São Paulo state, in the five weeks after most of its adult residents were given Sinovac shots, according to a study by Brazil’s Butantan Institute. Meanwhile, symptomatic infections in the town, which has a population of about 45,000, dropped by 80 percent and hospitalizations decreased by 86 percent.
The pandemic was not successfully managed in Serrana until the Sinovac doses were widely administered.
The death and case figures in neighboring localities were significantly higher, said Butantan Institute Director Dimas Covas, according to Bloomberg News. São Paulo has been badly affected by the coronavirus variant that emerged in Brazil, which the World Health Organization has since named “Gamma.”
Previous trials had given the vaccine an efficacy rate ranging from 50.4 percent in Brazil — barely above the 50 percent threshold that governments find usable — to more than 80 percent in Turkey. Singapore has received doses of the vaccine but not approved it for use, citing limited data.
The vaccine is largely used by developing economies and the study will be a big boost to vaccination efforts in Brazil, which has the third-highest case rate in the world. On Sunday, it reported more than 43,000 new infections, taking its case total to about 16.5 million.
Amid coronavirus crisis, China finds possible first human case of H10N3 bird flu strain
A man in China’s Jiangsu province, northwest of Shanghai, has become the first person known to have been infected with the H10N3 strain of bird flu, the Chinese government announced Tuesday.
China’s National Health Commission emphasized in a statement that there was no evidence that the strain can spread from human to human, adding that the risk of a significant outbreak was “very low.”
The patient, a 41-year-old man who lives in the city of Zhenjiang, was hospitalized April 28 after having a fever, the National Health Commission said. He was diagnosed with H10N3 a month later. Though the man remains under medical supervision, his condition was described as stable and meeting the standards for discharge. It was not clear from the statement how he caught the virus.
Sixty percent of D.C.-area students haven’t learned in a school building since March 2020
In the diverse and expansive Washington region, around 40 percent of its roughly 700,000 public school students are learning at least once a week in a school building. The other 420,000 students have been entirely remote since the coronavirus pandemic closed schools in March 2020, according to data from the region’s school systems.
The percentage of students reporting to a classroom in the two school districts that are majority Black and low-income — D.C. public schools and Prince George’s County public schools — is even lower, with just 28 percent of students learning in person part of the week.
Across the Potomac River, Arlington has the highest population of students learning in person — nearly 60 percent at the end of May. Sixty-nine percent of White students are learning in-person, but just 41 percent of Black students have returned.
Anthony Fauci’s emails offer a peek into his world in the early days of the coronavirus crisis
As the coronavirus pandemic engulfed the world last spring, Science magazine quoted a top Chinese health official saying that the United States and other Western nations were making a “big mistake” by not telling people to mask up. The official, George Gao, worried that the comment might upset his longtime friend Anthony S. Fauci, Washington’s leading expert on infectious diseases. So amid the deepening crisis, Gao reached out to clear the air.
“I saw the Science interview, how could I say such a word ‘big mistake’ about others? That was journalist’s wording. Hope you understand,” Gao, director of the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, wrote to Fauci in a March 28 email. "Lets work together to get the virus out of the earth.”
“I understand completely. No problem,” Fauci wrote back. “We will get through this together.”
Fauci’s actions during that period and beyond remain an intense focus for many Americans and political leaders. Now serving his seventh president, Fauci, 80, is helping to craft Biden’s pandemic strategy, and many Republicans accuse him of playing a key role in Trump’s loss in the November election.
During daily televised briefings at the White House, Fauci emerged as an at times reluctant — and polarizing — media star: To Trump supporters, he was a contrarian who seemed to undermine the president at every turn, while others viewed him as a reassuring voice of reason. The emails show that he was inundated with correspondence from colleagues, hospital administrators, foreign governments and random strangers — about 1,000 messages a day, he says at one point — writing to seek his advice, solicit his help or simply offer encouragement.
Two men are charged with stealing 192 donated ventilators bound for El Salvador
It was the dead of night when a white tractor truck pulled off a palm-lined road into the quiet parking lot of a South Florida warehouse. It rolled in with nothing in tow, but about one hour later, the truck drove off hauling a 53-foot trailer, an eagle emblazoned on the cab’s side clearly visible on a security camera.
It was a seemingly innocuous scene. But that trailer — which was longer than a school bus — was loaded with $3 million worth of government-owned ventilators bound for El Salvador, a donation from the U.S. Agency for International Development to aid the Central American country’s pandemic response. And it had just been stolen.
The August heist set off a sprawling, multiagency investigation of one of the most unusual and audacious crimes of the coronavirus crisis, culminating late last week in the arrest of the second of two suspects.
A new national model? Barbershops offer coronavirus shots in addition to cuts and shaves.
Reginald Alston never expected to get a coronavirus vaccine and never expected anyone would change his mind about it.
But his best friend, a hair salon owner, kept telling him he was being shortsighted and maybe even a little bit selfish. What about his niece and her newborn who live with him? How would he feel if they became sick? Also, his job as a contractor and painter meant he was often going into other people’s homes. Didn’t he want to be protected?
By the time that friend, Katrina Randolph, told him about the nearby barbershop hosting a vaccination clinic, and offered to drive him there, Alston, 57, was far along on the journey to changing his mind.
“She really influenced me to get it,” he acknowledged, standing on the sidewalk outside the Hyattsville, Md., barbershop earlier this month after getting immunized. “I listen to Katrina. I know she wants me to be around.”
Turkey relaxes some coronavirus restrictions as infections decline
ISTANBUL — Turkey on Tuesday eased some of its coronavirus restrictions as daily reported infections dipped below 6,500 — the lowest number in four months.
The government will relax nighttime and weekend curfews and allow gyms, cafes, restaurants and other businesses to open until 9 p.m., President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said in a televised address Monday.
A shorter nighttime curfew would remain in place, he said, as well as full lockdowns on Sunday to keep case numbers down. Most bars, clubs and concert venues will also stay closed and residents will be required to continue wearing masks.
Infections here surged in March and April as a more contagious variant first discovered in Britain — and renamed Alpha by the World Health Organization this week — tore through the population of about 82 million. The wave of new cases in spring marked the worst outbreak in Turkey since the pandemic began, reaching a record of more than 63,000 daily cases in April.
Authorities have reported more than 5.2 million infections and at least 47,000 deaths since March 2020. Some independent doctors, however, have accused the government of lying about the extent of the pandemic and say that both figures are massive undercounts.
Turkey’s vaccination rate also remains stubbornly low with just 15 percent of the population fully vaccinated despite a campaign that began in January.
The government bet big on the coronavirus vaccine developed by Sinovac — but not all of the promised doses have arrived. Turkey also signed a deal with Pfizer-BioNTech for 60 million vaccine doses, the health minister said, but it remained unclear when those shipments would land in the country.
Big U.S. travel surge during Memorial Day as millions take to the skies in first maskless holiday of pandemic
With half of American adults fully vaccinated against the coronavirus, millions are celebrating Memorial Day by taking to the skies, with authorities reporting a surge in air travel as many embark on their first maskless holiday since the pandemic began.
Nearly 2 million people passed through airport security checkpoints Friday, a new daily pandemic record, according to the Transportation Security Administration. About 6 million people were expected to go through airports this weekend, CBS News reported. Airports, including Los Angeles International, are breaking their 2021 records for daily passenger travel.
More than 37 million Americans are projected to travel 50 miles or more this holiday weekend, an increase of 60 percent compared with this time last year, which registered the lowest number of Memorial Day travelers on record, according to AAA. Just 23 million people traveled last year for the holiday, the company said.
Faced with a new variant and mounting cases, Vietnam scrambles for vaccines
Vietnam said Tuesday that it wanted to built a factory to supply vaccines to the Covax initiative that seeks to distribute doses equitably around the world, as its Health Ministry repeated a call for patents on coronavirus vaccines to be waived.
The Southeast Asian country has been a model of coronavirus containment since the start of the pandemic, but it is now struggling to control a small but fast-growing virus outbreak. Global concern grew Saturday, after Hanoi said it had detected a highly infectious new strand of the coronavirus that appeared to combine characteristics of two variants initially documented in Britain and India respectively.
“Vietnam would build the plant and would like to receive the patent so it could supply vaccines to Covax, to other countries as well as to Vietnam,” the ministry said in a statement, according to Reuters, after World Trade Organization talks on a possible waiver restarted Monday.
Many of the recent infections were located in two industrialized provinces in northern Vietnam, where brands such as Apple and Samsung have suppliers. Hanoi has sent around 400,000 doses to inoculate workers there, and it has asked international companies that manufacture in the Bac Ninh and Bac Giang provinces for help procuring vaccines, reported Bloomberg News.
Vietnam reported 161 new infections at noon on Tuesday. Roughly half of the nation’s 7,500 recorded cases were detected in the past month, and the number of infections remains relatively low by global standards. It has also registered just 47 covid-19 deaths. But only about 1 percent of the country, which has a population of around 100 million, has received at least one dose of a vaccine.
Vietnam’s health minister has also asked Covax to speed up deliveries. It is relying mainly on Oxford-AstraZeneca doses and has also approved the Russian-developed Sputnik V shot.
Unlike many other developing economies, Vietnam has not approved any Chinese-developed vaccines. Vietnam has a difficult relationship with its much larger neighbor."
frame of article is: other
###
article: "Covid Live Updates: Vaccinations for Younger Children Could Start in Days
A C.D.C. panel is meeting now, which you can watch below, and is expected to recommend shots for 5- to 11-year-olds. The Biden administration has enlisted 20,000 health workers and shipped 15 million doses ahead of the decision.
Is the Pfizer-BioNTech coronavirus vaccine safe for children ages 5 to 11? Does it work? Does every child need it?
The Food and Drug Administration on Friday authorized the vaccine for emergency use in those age groups, following a near-unanimous recommendation from its advisers last week. On Tuesday, a similar committee advising the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is meeting to have its say. (The meeting is streaming here.)
If, as expected, the advisers recommend the vaccine and the agency’s director, Dr. Rochelle Walensky, signs off, the decision would most likely ease the worries of millions of parents and buttress the United States’ defenses against the virus before winter arrives.
Dr. Walensky made a brief appearance as the meeting began, noting that the day was “one that many of us have been very eager to see.”
Still, she cautioned that vaccinating children is just one important piece to the puzzle. “It is important that we also continue to vaccinate as many adults as possible to provide protection to children in the community,” she said, including those children younger than age 5 who are not yet eligible for vaccination.
Inoculations for children ages 5 through 11 could then begin this week. Anticipating the agency’s decision, the Biden administration has enlisted more than 20,000 pediatricians, family doctors and pharmacies to administer the vaccines.
About 15 million doses are already being packed with dry ice, loaded into small specialized containers and shipped via airplanes and trucks to vaccination sites across the country, federal officials said on Monday. Several million pediatric doses should be available in the next few days, but the vaccination program for the age group will only start “running at full strength” in the second week of November, said Jeffrey D. Zients, the administration’s pandemic response coordinator.
The younger children will receive one-third of the dose authorized for those 12 and older, delivered by smaller needles and stored in smaller vials to avoid a mix-up with adult doses.
The C.D.C.’s guidelines for the vaccine’s use are not legally binding, but heavily influence the medical community’s practice. An endorsement would be timely, as Americans begin to plan for the winter holidays.
Although cases in the United States have been falling steadily for weeks, experts warn that indoor family gatherings during the Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays may send the rates soaring again, even if not to the horrific highs of last year. Airlines are preparing for what may be the busiest travel season since the start of the pandemic.
Vaccinations would ease the minds of many parents who are anxious to protect their young children and frustrated by frequent school shutdowns and quarantines. Outbreaks of the coronavirus forced 2,000 schools to close between early August and October.
Still, many parents are hesitant to immunize their children, citing concerns about long-term safety of the vaccine or because they fear that the vaccine is more harmful than Covid-19.
About three in 10 parents say they will definitely not get the vaccine for their 5- to 11-year-old children, according to the most recent poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation. A similar percentage of parents said that they would immunize their children “right away,” a figure that has barely budged since similar polls in July and September.
Before the F.D.A. advisers met last week, they were bombarded by thousands of emails spouting misinformation about the vaccine and asking the experts to vote against it. One common objection to the vaccine holds that children rarely get sick from the virus, and the vaccine’s potential harms may outweigh its benefits.
But while children are much less likely than adults to become seriously ill from the virus, their risk is not zero. Many children were infected with the coronavirus in the most recent surge, and children ages 5 through 11 accounted for nearly 11 percent of all cases the week of Oct. 10, according to data collected by the C.D.C.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, more than 8,300 children ages 5 to 11 have been hospitalized with Covid, and at least 94 have died. (Some provisional estimates are higher — at least 170 deaths.) About one-third of the hospitalized children were sick enough to be admitted to intensive care units.
Tracking the Coronavirus ›
|United States ›||United StatesAvg. on Nov. 1||14-day change|
|New cases||74,504||–11%|
|New deaths||1,309||–20%|
|World ›||WorldAvg. on Nov. 1||14-day change|
|New cases||435,554||+7%|
|New deaths||7,221||+7%|
An expert advisory committee to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention meets on Tuesday to consider whether to vote to recommend Pfizer-BioNTech’s coronavirus vaccine for use in children 5 to 11.
Last week the Food and Drug Administration decided to authorize the vaccine for that age group. Then there are steps at the C.D.C. and at the state level before the 28 million children in the age group could get shots.
Here’s what needs to happen first.
At the C.D.C.
The panel, a group of independent experts called the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, considers the F.D.A.’s decision and makes recommendations.
The C.D.C. contemplates the panel’s suggestions, which the agency usually follows.
The C.D.C., which is led by Dr. Rochelle P. Walensky, weighs in with final guidance, which influences how entities like states, hospitals and doctors’ offices distribute vaccines. In September, Dr. Walensky ignored the C.D.C. panel’s advice and recommended booster shots of Pfizer’s vaccine for frontline workers, aligning her agency’s guidance with the F.D.A.’s authorization.
In the states
State health authorities typically adopt the C.D.C.’s guidance, though it is not binding.
Pediatric doses will begin to become available once the regulatory process is done, but the vaccination program will only reach full strength next week, Jeffrey D. Zients, the White House's pandemic response coordinator, said on Monday.
The official daily death toll from the coronavirus in Russia hit a record of 1,178 on Tuesday as the authorities urged the public to get vaccinated and signaled that a partial lockdown could be extended in some regions.
Russia is in the middle of a vicious fourth wave of the coronavirus, which is wreaking havoc in a population that is largely unvaccinated and distrustful of government interventions to slow the spread. The police have opened 503 criminal investigations into the distribution of fake vaccine certificates since July and have shut down more than 2,000 websites peddling them, the Interior Ministry said on Tuesday.
President Vladimir V. Putin has declared this week to be a “nonworking” period, with nonessential workers encouraged to stay home and employers encouraged to pay them at least the minimum wage to do so. In some regions, including Moscow, restaurants, bars and other businesses are closed. There were signals that the restrictions might extend beyond seven days, but the Kremlin said on Tuesday that no official decisions had been confirmed.
Nonetheless, Anna Popova, a senior health official, said on Monday, “The effect from the measures being taken, and the ones that have been taken, will not come immediately.”
“It is likely that more time will be needed,” she added.
Russia’s coronavirus task force has been reporting more than 1,000 daily deaths since mid-October, for a total of 240,871 since the pandemic’s beginning, though those numbers undercount the true toll. The government’s statistics agency, which provides its own monthly figures, said last week that it had recorded at least 44,265 coronavirus deaths in September, and some 462,000 in total.
Less than half of Russian adults are vaccinated, according to the official statistics, a figure that may be difficult to lift, considering that 45 percent have no plans to get a shot, according to the independent polling center Levada. Analysts say that mixed government messaging and public distrust are to blame — the Russian vaccine Sputnik V has been widely available for months.
A mass text message sent out by the Moscow city government on Tuesday said, “You can protect your close ones by signing them up for a vaccine.” It noted that one out of every nine people older than 60 who contracted Covid was dying and that vaccinated people were eligible to receive a cash prize of 10,000 rubles, or about $140.
China has called on families and local governments to stock up on daily necessities as the country enforces stringent restrictions intended to curb a number of Covid outbreaks.
The Chinese Ministry of Commerce issued the guidance in a statement on Monday. The Economic Daily, a Communist Party-backed newspaper, said that the directives were an effort by the government to prepare the public for Covid lockdowns in the prelude to winter.
China has enforced a “zero Covid” policy that includes widespread testing and lockdowns to stamp out any small resurgence of the coronavirus. The country is battling several Covid-19 outbreaks.
Pan Chenjun, an agriculture analyst at the Dutch lender Rabobank, said, “The directive to stock up on necessities is mainly about warning residents to prepare for any quarantine if Covid cases occur in their community.”
Extreme weather events in recent months, including flooding, have ruined crops and disrupted food chain supplies in parts of the country, Ms. Pan added.
As a consequence, the cost of certain foods, such as vegetables, has soared. Some vegetables, like spinach, have doubled in price, in some cases costing as much as meat does, according to one local report.
Some residents have taken to social media in recent days to complain about the skyrocketing prices.
One commenter on the Chinese platform Weibo described the shock of being told the price of tomatoes during a recent trip to the market. “I thought I had a hearing problem,” the person wrote.
When the Biden administration announced that vaccinated foreign travelers would be allowed to enter the United States starting Nov. 8, it was as though a starting gun had been fired.
Skyscanner, a travel booking site, saw an 800 percent spike in bookings the day after the announcement. The week after the administration confirmed the date travelers could arrive, Expedia, the online booking site, saw a 28 percent increase in searches for U.S. hotels from Britain and a 24 percent increase from France.
Global coronavirus cases by region
This chart shows how reported cases per capita have changed in different parts of the world.
And even domestic tourism seems poised for a lift. Experts said that the U.S. reopening to those coming from overseas signaled to American travelers that they could leave their homes this coming holiday season, too. Searches for outbound international travel on the booking application Hopper, for instance, increased by 24 percent since the announcement, the highest uptick since the spring.
Though the travel industry continues to face staffing and regulatory challenges, the process of traveling is becoming smoother. Coronavirus tests needed before foreign flights are easier to book, and the process for checking documents at airports has been streamlined. But most important, travelers are becoming accustomed to the uncertainties of pandemic travel, planning for it rather than dreading it.
Federal regulators are reviewing data on the link between Moderna’s coronavirus vaccine and a rare heart problem in adolescents, the company announced on Sunday. That side effect — myocarditis, an inflammation of the heart muscle — has also worried advisers to federal agencies in deliberations regarding use of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine in younger children and teenagers.
Scientists advising the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention will review the latest data on the condition at a meeting on Tuesday before deciding whether to recommend the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine for younger children.
So how common is myocarditis? And should parents be concerned about vaccinating their children?
Absolutely not, said several experts familiar with the recent studies. While the vaccines made by Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna do seem to be associated with an increased risk of myocarditis, the absolute risk remains very small. Most cases are mild and resolve quickly.
Myocarditis generally results from infection with a virus or bacteria, and causes symptoms like rapid or irregular heartbeat, chest pain and shortness of breath. Globally, about 10 to 20 people out of every 100,000 develop myocarditis each year, but many others have mild symptoms and may never be diagnosed.
Since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, tens of thousands of U.S. children have been hospitalized with Covid-19, and 657 have died, according to data collected by the C.D.C.
Some children who are infected with the coronavirus may go on to develop long Covid, remaining ill for months after the initial infection is gone, or multisystem inflammatory syndrome, which has affected at least 5,200 children in the United States.
The myocarditis linked to the vaccines is far less frequent and severe compared with that observed in patients with Covid, and it does not seem to cause lasting harm, said Dr. James de Lemos, a cardiologist at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.
The coronavirus can infect cardiac muscle, as well as the lining of blood vessels, putting the heart and other organs at risk of long-term damage. The virus can also weaken the heart enough to require a transplant, and even cause lethal damage.
In addition to the big, juicy turkey on the table, there’s also an elephant lurking in the room this Thanksgiving: the vaccination status of your guests.
It’s a tricky thing to talk about. Do you ask your aunt if she received the Covid vaccine after she R.S.V.P.s? What if she says no? Do you endure another scaled-back celebration, like last year? Or should you serve up a bunch of precautions?
According to a Marist Poll published in September, most Americans (nearly 80 percent) say they have gotten or will get a Covid vaccine, but nearly 20 percent still say they do not intend to be vaccinated.
That doesn’t sit well with some of the people who have already rolled up their sleeves. A recent Harris Poll found that half of the more than 1,400 vaccinated respondents were either “extremely” or “considerably” hesitant to spend the holidays with unvaccinated family members or friends.
For some, the risk of celebrating with unvaccinated friends and relatives just isn’t worth it. But if you’re open to gathering with a mixed vaccination status group, there are ways to do it cautiously, experts say.
“Be not afraid, but be reasonable,” said Dr. Juan C. Salazar, a pediatric infectious diseases specialist and physician-in-chief of Connecticut Children’s in Hartford, Conn. You can still get together, he said, but each family will need to ask one crucial question: “What is the likelihood that we will get very sick from Covid-19?”
If you’re uncertain of how to proceed (or whether you ought to gather at all) we asked several experts for ideas on how to make Thanksgiving safer for everyone.
Start by calling your unvaccinated family members and soliciting their ideas on how to gather safely, said Daniel L. Shapiro, an associate professor of psychology at Harvard Medical School and the author of “Negotiating the Nonnegotiable: How to Resolve Your Most Emotionally Charged Conflicts.”
Ask: “What’s your advice on how we can make sure everyone feels safe and comfortable when we get together?” he suggested. Then come up with some ideas. Perhaps you suggest that there should be mandatory testing right before dinner, or that you should gather outside, near a patio heater.
Kristy Swanson, an actress who is a vocal vaccine skeptic and critic of Dr. Anthony Fauci, has been hospitalized with virus-related pneumonia in New Jersey, she said.
The actress, who is best known for playing the titular character in the 1992 film “Buffy the Vampire Slayer,” was taken by ambulance on Sunday to Virtua Memorial Hospital in Mount Holly, N.J., she said on Twitter on Monday. She said she had pneumonia and was being treated with oxygen, blood thinners and baricitinib, an arthritis drug that the Food and Drug Administration in July granted emergency authorization to treat Covid.
She said on Monday that she was “in good spirits” but was receiving treatments “so I don’t clot.”
“I was just at the tail end of my Covid diagnosis when it jumped into my lungs,” she said on Twitter.
Although it was not clear if Ms. Swanson, 51, has received a Covid vaccine, she has frequently criticized proponents of the vaccine. In September, she said on Twitter, alongside an article about Covid, that “it behaves just like the flu.”
Every year there is a new strain of the flu and “a new vaccine comes out for it,” she said. “That’s exactly what this whole thing is, except this time they want to mandate vaccines so they can make mo-money.”
On Monday afternoon, she said on Twitter: “Fact Check: I have NEVER said I am anti-vax.”
Ms. Swanson has been a vocal supporter of President Donald Trump and met him in the Oval Office in February last year. She has directed several critical tweets at Dr. Fauci, the top U.S. infectious disease official."
frame of article is: other
###
article: "WASHINGTON — In a ballroom across from the Capitol building, an unlikely group of military hawks, populist crusaders, Chinese Muslim freedom fighters and followers of the Falun Gong has been meeting to warn anyone who will listen that China poses an existential threat to the United States that will not end until the Communist Party is overthrown.
If the warnings sound straight out of the Cold War, they are. The Committee on the Present Danger, a long-defunct group that campaigned against the dangers of the Soviet Union in the 1970s and 1980s, has recently been revived with the help of Stephen K. Bannon, the president’s former chief strategist, to warn against the dangers of China.
Once dismissed as xenophobes and fringe elements, the group’s members are finding their views increasingly embraced in President Trump’s Washington, where skepticism and mistrust of China have taken hold. Fear of China has spread across the government, from the White House to Congress to federal agencies, where Beijing’s rise is unquestioningly viewed as an economic and national security threat and the defining challenge of the 21st century.
“These are two systems that are incompatible,” Mr. Bannon said of the United States and China. “One side is going to win, and one side is going to lose.”
The United States and China have been locked in difficult trade negotiations for the past two years, with talks plagued by a series of missteps and misunderstandings. Mr. Trump has responded to the lack of progress by steadily ratcheting up American tariffs on Chinese goods and finding other ways to retaliate. China has responded in kind.
The two sides now appear far from any agreement that would resolve the administration’s concerns about China, including forcing American companies operating there to hand over valuable technology. Even if a deal is reached, the two sides are busy constructing broader economic barriers.
In addition to placing a 25 percent tariff on roughly half of the goods China exports, the United States has restricted the kinds of technologies that can be exported to China, tried to cut off some Chinese companies, like telecom giant Huawei, from purchasing American products and rolled out hurdles for Chinese investment in the United States.
American intelligence agencies have also ratcheted up efforts to combat Chinese espionage, particularly at universities and research institutions. Officials from the F.B.I. and the National Security Council have been dispatched to Ivy League universities to warn administrators to be vigilant against Chinese students who may be gathering technological secrets from their laboratories to pass to Beijing.
The administration paints the crackdown as necessary to protect the United States. But there are growing concerns that it is stoking a new red scare, fueling discrimination against students, scientists and companies with ties to China and risking the collapse of a fraught but deeply enmeshed trade relationship between the world’s two largest economies.
“I’m worried that some people are going to say, because of this fear, any policy is justifiable,” said Scott Kennedy, a China expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. “The climate of fear that is being created needs to help generate the conversation, not end the conversation.”
Anti-China sentiment has spread quickly, with Republicans and Democrats, labor union leaders, Fox News hosts and others warning that China’s efforts to build up its military and advanced industries threaten America’s global leadership, and that the United States should respond aggressively. Skepticism has seeped into nearly every aspect of China’s interaction with the United States, with officials questioning China’s presence on American stock markets, its construction of American subway cars and its purchase of social media networks.
Yet there is little agreement on what America can or should do. The United States has tried for decades to entice and cajole China to become a more open society, but the Communist Party has steadily tightened its grip over the Chinese people and the economy. American leaders now face a choice of whether to continue down a path of engagement that could leave the country vulnerable to economic and security threats — or embark on a path of disengagement that could weaken both economies and might one day even lead to war.
An increasing number of people in Washington now view the decoupling of the two economies as inevitable — including many of the members of the Committee on the Present Danger. At an inaugural meeting in April, Mr. Bannon, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker, and others issued paeans to Ronald Reagan — a former member of the group — and were met with standing ovations as they called for vigilance against China.
They praised Mr. Reagan’s Cold War victory over the Soviet Union and his doctrine of “peace through strength,” but there was also an air of inevitability that war might come, only this time with China.
Mr. Bannon was just off the plane from Rome, with a slight shadow of a mustache and his silver hair brushed back. Clad in a black button-down and long black suit jacket, he thumped the podium as he described China as a rising power and the United States as a declining power that would inevitably clash.
“This is the defining event of our time, and 100 years from now, this is what they’re going to remember us for,” he said.
The committee’s two earliest iterations, in the 1950s and again in the 1970s, called for an arms buildup to counter the Soviets. The second iteration, formed over a luncheon table at Washington’s Metropolitan Club in 1976, issued documents warning against Soviet expansionism, with titles like “Is America Becoming Number 2?”
The group reached the height of its influence during the Reagan administration, in which dozens of its members eventually held posts, including as the national security adviser and C.I.A. director. But as the Soviet threat faded, so did the committee.
The group was briefly active again starting in 2004, this time to warn against the threat of Islamic extremism. The committee’s vice chair, Frank Gaffney, is the founder of the Center for Security Policy, a think tank that argues that mosques and Muslims across America are engaged in a “stealth jihad” to “Islamize” the country by taking advantage of American pluralism and democracy.
The group’s activity largely died down until concern over China rekindled interest.
Today’s committee acknowledges that the threat from China is different from Soviet Russia because the American and Chinese economies are much more integrated. But Washington is increasingly reaching back into the Cold War toolbox to confront the threat.
The administration has placed Chinese tech companies on an “entity list,” essentially blacklisting them from doing business with American firms. In keeping with a law passed last year, the administration has increased its checks of Chinese investment, including of minority stakes in American companies. Last June, the administration began restricting visas for Chinese graduate students in sensitive research fields like robotics and aviation. And the United States has begun barring Chinese academics from the United States if they are suspected of having links to Chinese intelligence agencies.
“They’re not the Soviet Union. But this kind of government control, statism, never works for long,” Larry Kudlow, the White House chief economic adviser, said in a July 16 interview with Sinclair Broadcast Group. The possibility that China could collapse like the Soviet Union has “always been an undercurrent” in the trade war, he said.
The new Cold War has not been one-sided. Many of the changes in Washington have been triggered by a darker turn in Beijing.
China has increased its scrutiny of American firms, and many American companies and their employees in China now fear reprisal. In addition to detaining millions of Chinese Muslims, democracy activists and others, Chinese authorities have jailed foreign diplomats, academics and businesspeople — prompting some to cancel or delay trips to China.
China is also projecting its power abroad, funding global infrastructure and constructing an archipelago of artificial islands with giant air bases reaching almost to the shores of Malaysia and Indonesia. Beijing has made it clear that it intends to help its companies dominate the industries of the future, from artificial intelligence and supercomputers to aerospace equipment. Its policies have sought to replace imports of high-tech products with Chinese-made goods, pressuring multinationals to move factories from the United States and resulting in the loss of American jobs.
China has rejected entreaties by the Trump administration to curb these activities, arguing that it is simply pursuing its own economic development. In an interview after trade talks broke down in May, Liu He, China’s top negotiator, said that areas of disagreement between the United States and China focused on “major matters of principle” on which China was unlikely to bend.
The chill in relations has begun to weigh on Chinese investment in the United States, along with Chinese students and tourism. Chinese investment in American residential and commercial real estate has begun to decline. Companies are increasingly diversifying away from China, wary of the president’s ongoing economic war.
Nintendo, GoPro, Hasbro and other companies are reconsidering factories in China, choosing to source products from Vietnam, the United States, Mexico and India instead.
Susan Shirk, the chair of the 21st Century China Center at the University of California at San Diego, said the United States is at risk of being gripped by “an anti-Chinese version of the Red Scare” that is driving Chinese talent away and could rupture what little good will is left between the two countries.
“We’ve made this mistake once before, during the Cold War,” Ms. Shirk said. “And I don’t think we should make it again.”
Chinese nationals and Americans of Chinese heritage say they have felt the chilling effects. Some suspect they are being passed over for promotions and grants. Supporters of engagement have been dismissed as apologists or even traitors.
“Chinese Americans feel targeted,” said Charlie Woo, chief executive of Megatoys and a member of the Committee of 100, an organization of prominent Chinese-Americans. “And that’s really hurtful.”
The Trump administration and the Committee on the Present Danger have been careful to say their targets are the Chinese government and the Communist Party, not the Chinese people. But the distinction can be a difficult one to make. In the rush to protect against new threats from China, the line between preparedness and paranoia is sometimes unclear.
At a Senate hearing last year, Christopher A. Wray, the F.B.I. director, said the Trump administration was trying to “view the China threat as not just a whole-of-government threat, but a whole-of-society threat,” adding, “I think it’s going to take a whole-of-society response by us.”
Many Chinese people and their defenders have bristled at the implication that the entire Chinese society poses a national security threat.
Toby Smith, vice president for policy at the Association for American Universities, said that American universities were working hard to remain vigilant to espionage threats, but that they thrive on openness and access to talent and science from around the world — including from China.
“The situation with China is different than the Cold War,” he said. “The concern with the Soviet Union was primarily military. Now it’s a concern about economic competitiveness.”"
frame of article is: government
###
article: "White House Floats $1.8 Trillion Stimulus Offer in Last-Ditch Effort
The White House, seeking to revive stimulus talks that President Trump called off just days ago, planned on Friday to put forward its largest offer for economic relief yet, as some Republicans worried about being blamed by voters for failing to deliver needed aid ahead of the election.
The new proposal, for Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin to present to congressional Democrats, would increase the White House’s plan for coronavirus stimulus to $1.8 trillion.
The president “would like to do a deal,” Larry Kudlow, director of the National Economic Council, said on the Fox Business Network on Friday, in the latest head-snapping turn in the on-again-off-again negotiations. The overall price tag of the offer was confirmed by two people familiar with the discussions, who spoke on condition of anonymity to disclose details of the talks.
Fanning the sense of optimism, Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter: “Covid Relief Negotiations are moving along. Go Big!”
The prospects of a compromise remained remote, however, given the opposition of many Republicans to another large infusion of federal virus aid. Speaking to reporters in Kentucky, Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, cast doubt on the chances of a deal, saying political divisions remained too deep less than a month before Election Day.
“The situation is kind of murky and I think the murkiness is a result of the proximity to the election and everybody kind of trying to elbow for political advantage,” Mr. McConnell said. “I’d like to see us rise above that like we did back in March and April, but I think that’s unlikely in the next three weeks.”
Yet the White House was working to resuscitate negotiations that Mr. Trump himself cut off in a series of indignant tweets on Tuesday, amid deep concern among some vulnerable Republicans that his abrupt abandonment of the talks would hurt them politically.
Mr. Kudlow said that the president met with Mr. Mnuchin and Mark Meadows, White House chief of staff, on Friday and that the Treasury secretary would speak with Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California later Friday afternoon.
Without an agreement, the collateral damage across the country has continued to mount in the absence of federal funding, with more than 800,000 Americans filing new applications for state benefits, before adjusting for seasonal variations.
Even if Ms. Pelosi were to accept the administration’s latest proposal, which is lower than the $2.2 trillion package she pushed through the House this month, Senate Republicans remain divided over the scope of another coronavirus relief package.
Most of them opposed the original $1 trillion offer Mr. McConnell presented in July, after days of haggling with the White House, in part because they were concerned about adding to the national debt. Mr. McConnell has since scaled back the offer considerably, proposing a $350 billion “skinny” plan that Democrats blocked, calling it inadequate.
A White House official said that Mr. Trump was calling Republican senators on Friday to drum up enthusiasm for a last-minute deal. Mr. Mnuchin’s offer is expected to include measures that Republicans have previously rejected, the official said, suggesting an increase in state in local funding is likely to be included in the proposal.
— Emily Cochrane and
House Democrats on Friday accused the Treasury Department of undermining a provision in the March stimulus law aimed at saving aviation jobs.
Democrats on the Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Crisis said in a report that the Treasury delayed distributing money lawmakers had authorized for the aviation industry, which resulted in more than 16,500 job cuts that could have been avoided.
“Congress appropriated billions of dollars to keep aviation workers employed at least through September 30, 2020,” the report’s authors wrote. “Unfortunately, Treasury’s poor implementation of the Payroll Support Program meant that thousands of workers lost their jobs well before that date — even though their former employers received taxpayer assistance to cover the cost of their paychecks.”
Under the CARES Act, Congress authorized the Treasury to provide the aviation industry up to $32 billion to pay wages and benefits, as long as the companies receiving those funds committed to refraining from broad cuts through September. The industry has been pushing for a second round of aid, but that effort has faltered in recent weeks.
The law required the Treasury to start distributing the aid in early April, but initial payments didn’t go out until May 15 and many catering, cargo and other industry contractors didn’t finalize agreements until well into the summer. Because of that delay, many smaller contractors were forced to furlough or layoff workers, the report noted.
At the same time, the Democratic report said that the Treasury allowed the businesses to cut jobs until the funding was sent out without requiring the affected workers to be rehired. That provided companies an incentive to layoff or furlough workers before they had completed the formalities of securing federal assistance, according to the report.The lawmakers said that some companies received funds for employees they no longer employed.
The report’s authors recommend that any further funding come with stronger job protections and a requirement that the Treasury expedites payments. They also said that the CARES Act should be amended to ban job cuts for any business that has yet to spend all of the federal aid it received.
Advertisement
Stocks ended higher on Friday, after a turbulent week in which President Trump injected confusion into talks between the Treasury Department and Congress on the prospects of a broad stimulus bill to aid small businesses, local governments and out-of-work Americans, halting them and then restarting them again.
The S&P 500 climbed 0.9 percent, and ended the week with a gain of nearly 4 percent.
The gains on Friday came as Speaker Nancy Pelosi said in a television interview that she hoped a deal would be reached soon, and Larry Kudlow, who advises the president on economic policy, said Mr. Trump had “approved a revised package.”
And the White House was preparing a new proposal for a $1.8 trillion stimulus, for Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin to present to congressional Democrats. Democrats in the House have already passed a plan for $2.2 trillion of spending, and the White House had previously said it was seeking to spend $1.6 trillion.
But also on Friday, the Senate Majority leader, Mitch McConnell, cast doubt on the likelihood for a deal when he said the prospects for more aid were unclear, with the election just weeks away.
The mixed messages were just the latest in a tumultuous week in which Mr. Trump called off talks only to reverse himself two days later. That has left investors hopeful, but uncertain about the prospects for a deal.
Instead, some investors have begun to look past the short-term uncertainty of whether an agreement will be reached before the election, instead focusing on the potential for a “blue wave” that sweeps Democrats into power and enables former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. to enact a much larger stimulus spending plan.
“Any near-term fiscal deal looked unlikely this close to the election. Hopes of a deal post-election hinge on the outcome of the race,” Michael Pearce, senior U.S. economist with Capital Economics, wrote in a note to clients Friday. “The bigger factor driving markets this week was the continued swing in both betting odds and polling averages, which show the Democrats are increasingly favored to not only win the presidency but take control of the Senate too.”
The focus on another round of support from Washington comes as the number of virus cases around the world rises, and the recovery in major economies — including the United States — show signs of losing steam. Britain on Friday said its gross domestic product rose 2.1 percent in August over the month before, less than expected and the smallest monthly increase since the economy started expanding again in late spring. The British economy is still 9 percent smaller than it was before the pandemic.
Microsoft will allow its employees to work from home permanently, as coronavirus cases continue to climb in the United States and companies struggle to figure out how to arrange offices in a way that keeps workers socially distanced and safe.
Microsoft this week issued guidelines for its planned “hybrid model” of working after pandemic restrictions are lifted. Some employees could work from home less than half the time and still retain their company offices, the company said in a staff memo. Other options, with company approval, would include permanently working from home and relocating to other states or even countries.
The new guidelines, first reported in The Verge, are “guided by employee input, data, and our commitment to support individual workstyles and business needs,” Microsoft said in a statement. Microsoft previously said that its offices will not reopen until January 2021 at the earliest.
The news comes a day after Target and Ford Motor said that they would allow employees to continue to work from home through June 2021.
Target’s decision, announced in a letter to staff, applies just to employees at its headquarters in Minneapolis. The company said that a small number of employees who rely on the headquarter facilities would continue to work on-site. The retailer also said it was using this time as an opportunity to reimagine the role of its office in a post-pandemic era.
“As we look to the future, our headquarters environment will include a hybrid model of remote and on-site work,” Target wrote in the letter. “This will allow for the flexibility many of you have come to value, while also providing opportunity for the in-person connection and collaboration that’s central to our team and culture.”
Ford also said its decision would apply to its roughly 32,000 employees in North America who are already working remotely.
The announcements by Microsoft, Ford and Target come after several other companies, including Google, Uber and Slack, have decided that employees need not return to the office until at least next summer.
Some companies have tried bringing employees back to the office, but not always successfully. Last month, Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase had to send some workers back home after employees tested positive for the virus.
— Gillian Friedman and
What hopes remained that Europe was recovering from the economic catastrophe delivered by the pandemic have all but disappeared as the lethal virus has resumed spreading rapidly.
France, Europe’s second-largest economy, this week amplified the concern as the government downgraded its forecast pace of expansion for the last three months of the year from an already minimal 1 percent to zero. Overall, the statistics agency predicts the economy will contract by 9 percent this year.
The diminished expectations are a direct outgrowth of alarm over the revival of the virus. France reported nearly 19,000 new cases on Wednesday — a one-day record, and nearly double the number seen the day before. The surge prompted President Emmanuel Macron to announce new restrictions, including a two-month shutdown of cafes and bars in Paris and surrounding areas.
In Spain, the central bank governor this week warned that the accelerating spread of the virus could force the government to impose restrictions that would produce an economic contraction of as much as 12.6 percent this year.
The European Central Bank’s chief economist on Tuesday cautioned that the 19 countries that share the euro currency may not recover from the disaster until 2022, with those that are dependent on tourism especially vulnerable.
Summer increasingly feels like a distant memory.
In August, with infection rates down, lockdowns lifted, and many Europeans indulging in the sacred ritual of the summer holiday, signs of revival were abundant. Many European economies expanded dramatically as people returned to shops, restaurants and vacation destinations.
Hopes had also been buoyed by a landmark agreement forged by the European Union to raise a $750 billion ($883 billion) euro relief fund through the sale of bonds backed collectively by all members. That move transcended years of resistance from debt-averse northern European countries.
But most economists assumed that better times would last only so long as the virus could be contained.
“Consumer activity slowed at the end of September,” said Moritz Degler, a senior economist at Oxford Economics in London, in a recent report. “With the health situation unlikely to improve in the near term, we expect the recovery to slow again over the next few weeks.”
Fall has also brought a realization that complex hurdles remain before the European Union’s relief fund can be administered, limiting prospects in the worst-hit countries like Spain and Italy.
Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez on Wednesday announced a stimulus spending plan worth 72 billion euros ($85 billion), with four-fifths of the money slated to come from the European fund.
Spain may have to wait for that money. The fund is supposed to be operational by January, yet almost certainly will confront delays as European Union members debate conditions on its distribution — especially rules aimed at forcing Hungary and Poland to abide by the democratic norms of the bloc.
The continent’s prospects for recovery are further restrained by rules that limit debts by members of the European Union and curb spending. Those strictures have been suspended, but they will return eventually, limiting growth prospects.
Italy is counting on receiving 209 billion euros ($246 billion) from the European relief fund, but the government is also pledging to bring down its public debt, which exceeded 134 percent of annual economic output at the end of last year. Such austerity, just as the pandemic increases costs for medical care, will almost certainly plunge Italy into a longer and deeper recession.
Advertisement
The Trump administration levied tariffs on $1.96 billion of imported aluminum sheet from 18 countries on Friday, saying that foreign producers were selling their products at unfairly low prices and undercutting American manufacturers.
In an interview on Fox Business Network on Friday morning, Wilbur Ross, the secretary of commerce, called the move “the largest and most far-reaching case that our department has brought in more than 20 years.” He said Germany would feel the largest impact, followed by Bahrain.
Mr. Ross traced part of the problem back to China. He said China was dumping its excess capacity into other markets, which would then find its way into the United States. “The net effect is a lot of dumping in the U.S., and that’s what we’re clamping down on,” he said.
The United States, which imported $15.9 billion of aluminum in 2019, has already imposed a 10 percent tariff on imported aluminum from many countries, though Canada, Mexico and others have earned certain exemptions. Some American aluminum makers support the tariffs, but the levies have angered many manufacturers that make cars, boats, recreational vehicles, washing machines and other products, and now have to pay higher prices for their raw materials.
The U.S. government typically brings dozens of trade cases against foreign countries every year for unfairly subsidizing and pricing their products. But the Trump administration has been particularly aggressive in pursuing and welcoming such cases from various industries, and has initiated 286 of them so far during its term.
The tariffs, which went into effect immediately, apply to products from Bahrain, Brazil, Croatia, Egypt, Germany, Greece, India, Indonesia, Italy, Oman, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Taiwan and Turkey. The tariff rates vary by country and range up to 353 percent of the cost of the good.
Several U.S. aluminum manufacturers requested the tariffs, including Arconic, Novelis Corporation, Texarkana Aluminum and Constellium Rolled Products Ravenswood.
The Commerce Department will begin collecting the levies immediately, but they could still be struck down and retroactively reimbursed. The U.S. International Trade Commission will make its final decision on the case on April 5, 2021, the Commerce Department said.
Britain’s economic recovery from the coronavirus pandemic has already lost its momentum as the country faces a challenging winter. According to data published Friday, gross domestic product rose 2.1 percent in August from the previous month, far below economists’ expectations and the slowest increase since the recovery began in late spring.
More than half the economic gains came from the hospitality sector, including hotels and restaurants, as people vacationed closer to home and the government’s “Eat Out to Help Out” program of meal discounts seemed to really help growth. Still, the overall economy was 9 percent smaller than it was in February before the pandemic.
Britain’s difficulties are echoed across Europe, where a benign summer has given way to a rapid increase in coronavirus cases and new social restrictions that are likely to curtail economic growth. In anticipation of more restrictions from the government, Britain’s Treasury on Friday introduced more job support measures, just two weeks after the latest plans were announced. Starting next month, the government will pay two-thirds of staff wages at companies that are legally required to close their doors, for example if bars and restaurants are told to shut again. The government also announced increased grants to these businesses.
The National Institute of Economic and Social Research in London said it now expected growth to stall in September. Analysts at Citigroup and Bank of America also cut their forecasts for economic growth for the rest of the year.
“August now seems to have been, ‘as good as it gets’ with respect to either formal restrictions or levels of virus fear,” Citigroup’s economists wrote. “During the latter part of the year, we expect lingering virus concerns and ongoing restrictions to preclude any further rebound.”
Thursday, Oct. 8
Pelosi rules out airlines-only aid plan as President Trump claims stimulus talks are back on.
Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California on Thursday said she would not agree to stand-alone aid package for airlines unless the Trump administration committed to a broader pandemic relief plan to help struggling Americans, declaring that “there is no stand-alone bill without a bigger bill.”
Her comments cast doubt on the prospects for a compromise just hours after President Trump had given an upbeat assessment, saying in an interview that he had reconsidered his decision to pull the plug on bipartisan negotiations on a stimulus plan until after the election.
“I shut down talks two days ago because they weren’t working out,” Mr. Trump said during a wide-ranging interview on Fox Business. “Now they’re starting to work out.”
The U.S. budget deficit topped a record $3 trillion for the 2020 fiscal year.
The federal budget deficit was $3.1 trillion for the 2020 fiscal year, the Congressional Budget Office estimated on Thursday. The deficit is a record for the United States in terms of total dollars and is a direct result of the federal response to the coronavirus pandemic.
Federal spending from April through the end of September was $4.2 trillion, nearly double the same period in 2019, the budget office reported. Individual and corporate income tax receipts fell by $191 billion, or about 17 percent, in April through September, compared with the year before.
Wednesday, Oct. 7
Fed officials warned of slower growth without more stimulus, minutes show.
Federal Reserve officials were counting on Congress and the White House to pass additional aid for households and businesses hit by the pandemic when they released their latest economic forecasts, minutes from their Sept. 15-16 meeting showed. Many “noted that their economic outlook assumed additional fiscal support and that if future fiscal support was significantly smaller or arrived significantly later than they expected, the pace of the recovery could be slower than anticipated,” according to notes from the meeting.
More than 100 million are at risk of poverty, the World Bank says.
The World Bank warned on Wednesday that the coronavirus pandemic could push more than 100 million people into extreme poverty this year, elevating the global poverty rate for the first time in more than two decades. In a new report, the bank said that 88 million to 115 million people will be living on less than $1.90 a day, lifting the poverty rate — which had been projected to decline this year before the pandemic hit — as high as 9.4 percent.
Tuesday, Oct. 6
Powell warns of prolonged economic pain without more aid.
The Federal Reserve chair, Jerome H. Powell, delivered a message to his fellow policymakers on Tuesday: Faced with a once-in-a-century pandemic that has inflicted economic pain on millions of households, go big.
“Too little support would lead to a weak recovery, creating unnecessary hardship for households and businesses,” Mr. Powell said in remarks prepared for virtual delivery before the National Association for Business Economics.
Nearly 16,000 cases in the U.K. weren’t counted because of a spreadsheet glitch.
Nearly 16,000 positive coronavirus cases recently went unrecorded in England’s tracking system, officials said on Monday. The glitch led to an undercount of the country’s tally and a delay in tracing infected people’s contacts, leaving tens of thousands of people in the dark about their potential exposure.
The culprit was a spreadsheet snafu, explains the DealBook newsletter. Specifically, the system relied on files formatted for an older version of Microsoft Excel, which can only handle a certain number of cells. When key files got too big, thousands of entries were skipped. To fix the problem, large files are now split before feeding them into the system — in other words, more spreadsheets.
Monday, Oct. 5
The owner of Regal Cinemas is closing its U.S. theaters, with 40,000 jobs at stake.
The plight of the entertainment industry deepened on Monday as the British company Cineworld, which owns Regal Cinemas in the United States, said it would temporarily close all 663 of its movie theaters in the United States and Britain. The move was expected to affect 40,000 employees in the United States and 5,000 in Britain.
The company said it could not entice viewers back without a pipeline of new films. The news came after Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer announced on Friday it would push back the release date of the latest James Bond film, “No Time to Die,” to April from this fall — the second time its release date has been delayed because of the pandemic.
The next Pixar movie, “Soul,” will be made available online instead of in theaters because of the pandemic, the Walt Disney Company said. The film, about a jazz musician who is magically transported to an otherworldly place where personalities are created, will arrive on Disney+ on Dec. 25 at no additional cost to subscribers (unlike the recent “Mulan,” which was accessible for a $30 surcharge). “Soul” had been scheduled for theatrical release on Nov. 20."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Advertisement
Supported by
In Nevada, Unemployed Workers Wait for Aid That Will Still Not Be Enough
Stimulus checks may be on their way, but those struggling to get by worry that the money will soon be gone. “Every morning I wake up thinking about where my help is going to come from,” one woman said.
LAS VEGAS — Bobby Hernandez plans to spend his stimulus check on medication to manage his diabetes. Wilma Estrella will use hers to pay the electricity bill. Lizbeth Ramos intends to catch up on the rent, though the money will not be enough to cover all that she owes.
They are hardly alone: No state’s work force has been battered as badly by the coronavirus pandemic as Nevada’s, and people are especially struggling in Las Vegas, a boom-and-bust city where tourist dollars and lavish tips have given way to shuttered hotels and weed-strewn parking lots.
It is hard to remember the level of optimism and exuberance that prevailed here a year ago, as presidential hopefuls traipsed through the state for the Democratic caucuses. The economy had roared back from the Great Recession, and it could seem that growth was limitless.
Today, the grim desperation is softened only by the hope that vaccinations will bring tourists eager to celebrate and spend. Though most casinos have reopened, they have a small fraction of the tourists they once did. Many restaurants have shuttered their doors for good, and those that are open are at limited capacity.
As a result, a year into the pandemic, Las Vegas has the highest unemployment rate among large cities, with more than 10 percent out of work, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and over the last year the work force in Nevada has lost more income than in any other state.
For many, the only thing that cushioned the blow was the federal stimulus checks. Now more money is on the way: The $1.9 trillion relief bill that President Biden signed Thursday would direct about $4 billion to the state. Vice President Kamala Harris plans to visit the city Monday, part of the administration’s effort to rally public support for the measure.
But for those scraping to get by, the promise of another stimulus payment has not relieved the anxiety of knowing that, no matter how much it helps, it will almost certainly fall short.
“I feel pretty scared every day, right now, whenever I think about my bills,” Ms. Ramos, a 32-year-old waitress, said as she loaded bags from a food pantry into her trunk on a recent afternoon. “Basically every morning I wake up thinking about where my help is going to come from — is it here? Is it the government? I don’t really know who is looking out for people like me.”
Because the economy relies so heavily on tourism and the service industry, Nevada — and Las Vegas particularly — is one of the most economically vulnerable parts of the country. The coronavirus pushed the state to an economic cliff even more dramatically than the recession did a decade ago.
Last year, the Democratic-controlled Legislature slashed some $1.2 billion from the state budget, stopping construction projects and cutting funding to the health budget. In April, Nevada registered unemployment of 29.5 percent, higher than in any state in any month since the Bureau of Labor Statistics started tracking state unemployment rates in 1976.
The downturn has many Nevadans scrambling to keep up. Roughly one million Nevada residents, some 45 percent of adults in the state, have fallen behind on basic household expenses, according to an analysis by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a liberal research group.
One of them is MaryAnn Bautista, a single mother of five. She said she could still remember the shock she felt a year ago, when managers at the hotel where she worked told her she was being laid off. She could not hold back tears as she finished her shift at the buffet there. When a couple of customers asked if they could help, she could only shake her head.
In the last year, she has received help from her adult children, food banks and a program run by her union to help her cover one month’s rent. She receives unemployment as well.
But what Ms. Bautista wants most is the job she held for more than 17 years, which she will lose permanently unless she is called in for a shift in the next week. (Under the union contract, she is entitled to the same job and seniority if she is called back to work within a year — after that, the claim to the job evaporates.)
“I struggle so much, I lie awake in bed calculating what I can pay this time, what can wait a little longer?” she said.
Ms. Bautista is particularly pained by the fact that her teenage daughter has begun working as much as 40 hours a week at a local amusement park to try to help pay the bills. “There’s no way out of this until I have a job,” she said. “That’s what I think every time I break down.”
Even as infection rates decline, there are signs that the economy could sour again — nearly 100,000 fewer residents in the state had jobs last month compared to February of last year. Employment is even worse for low-wage workers, dropping some 23 percent among residents who earn less than $27,000 a year, according to the Center for American Progress. Claims for unemployment insurance are more than triple what they were in 2019, the study found.
And it is unclear whether the glittery city will ever return to its prepandemic heyday. After the longtime casino magnate Sheldon Adelson died in January, his company sold off both of its Las Vegas properties, saying it would concentrate on its businesses in Asia.
“We’re in a world of hurt here in terms of Las Vegas,” Rob Goldstein, the president and chief executive of the company, Las Vegas Sands, said in July. “I’ve never felt more gloomy than I do today about what’s happening in Las Vegas.”
A little more than a year ago, the ballroom at the Culinary Academy of Las Vegas played host to presidential candidates, there to talk with leaders from the most powerful labor union in the state and one of the most politically powerful in the country. Today, the ballroom is covered with onion skins and dried beans, as dozens of workers pack boxes brimming with food for out-of-work union members. Roughly half of all members are still without a job — an improvement from last spring, when more than 90 percent of them did not have work.
Frequently Asked Questions About the New Stimulus Package
The stimulus payments would be $1,400 for most recipients. Those who are eligible would also receive an identical payment for each of their children. To qualify for the full $1,400, a single person would need an adjusted gross income of $75,000 or below. For heads of household, adjusted gross income would need to be $112,500 or below, and for married couples filing jointly that number would need to be $150,000 or below. To be eligible for a payment, a person must have a Social Security number. Read more.
Buying insurance through the government program known as COBRA would temporarily become a lot cheaper. COBRA, for the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, generally lets someone who loses a job buy coverage via the former employer. But it’s expensive: Under normal circumstances, a person may have to pay at least 102 percent of the cost of the premium. Under the relief bill, the government would pay the entire COBRA premium from April 1 through Sept. 30. A person who qualified for new, employer-based health insurance someplace else before Sept. 30 would lose eligibility for the no-cost coverage. And someone who left a job voluntarily would not be eligible, either. Read more
This credit, which helps working families offset the cost of care for children under 13 and other dependents, would be significantly expanded for a single year. More people would be eligible, and many recipients would get a bigger break. The bill would also make the credit fully refundable, which means you could collect the money as a refund even if your tax bill was zero. “That will be helpful to people at the lower end” of the income scale, said Mark Luscombe, principal federal tax analyst at Wolters Kluwer Tax & Accounting. Read more.
There would be a big one for people who already have debt. You wouldn’t have to pay income taxes on forgiven debt if you qualify for loan forgiveness or cancellation — for example, if you’ve been in an income-driven repayment plan for the requisite number of years, if your school defrauded you or if Congress or the president wipes away $10,000 of debt for large numbers of people. This would be the case for debt forgiven between Jan. 1, 2021, and the end of 2025. Read more.
The bill would provide billions of dollars in rental and utility assistance to people who are struggling and in danger of being evicted from their homes. About $27 billion would go toward emergency rental assistance. The vast majority of it would replenish the so-called Coronavirus Relief Fund, created by the CARES Act and distributed through state, local and tribal governments, according to the National Low Income Housing Coalition. That’s on top of the $25 billion in assistance provided by the relief package passed in December. To receive financial assistance — which could be used for rent, utilities and other housing expenses — households would have to meet several conditions. Household income could not exceed 80 percent of the area median income, at least one household member must be at risk of homelessness or housing instability, and individuals would have to qualify for unemployment benefits or have experienced financial hardship (directly or indirectly) because of the pandemic. Assistance could be provided for up to 18 months, according to the National Low Income Housing Coalition. Lower-income families that have been unemployed for three months or more would be given priority for assistance. Read more.
“We never ever have had something like this before,” said Geoconda Argüello-Kline, the head of the union, Culinary Workers Local 226. “We have more need than ever and we have to realize this is an emergency. The Democrats always say they are for working people, so we elect them, and now we expect them to find more ways to help in this crisis.”
Late last year, Guadalupe Rodriguez left the home she had rented for more than a decade and moved into a ranch-style home with one of her co-workers from the Strat hotel. Both were laid off last March. Along with another roommate, they are cobbling together enough money to pay the mortgage and household bills. But she finds it hard not to grow angry at the government.
“I have not asked for much my entire life, but now we need the help,” Ms. Rodriguez said.
She could not receive any of the stimulus money last year, she said, because she was married at the time to an undocumented immigrant. This time around, she will receive a check, but in her mind it has been spent before it even arrives. “It feels like they do these things, they get attention, but the money won’t stay,” she said. “We will be hurting again tomorrow.”
The short bursts of cash from stimulus checks create a cyclical living experience, as the relief of being able to make some payments or buy food gives way to the anxiety of bills to come.
“Stimulus money shortens the line for food from a food pantry and when it evaporates, the lines get longer again,” said Larry Scott, the chief operating officer for Three Square Food Bank, the largest in Southern Nevada. “We’re going to have a protracted, long, long recovery here. What the politicians should be concentrating on is more than a short-term solution. Rather than a lot of money at a short time, we should have more money over a longer period of time.”
The pain is also disproportionately hurting those who can least afford it, sending families who were already teetering close to poverty to the streets; families living in tents now inhabit the freeway underpasses throughout the region.
Ms. Bautista, the single mother of five, knows she is one of the lucky ones. She signed up for and received unemployment checks within weeks, while some of her former co-workers were caught up in the system for months.
Typically, she has just enough to cover the roughly $2,000 she has to pay for rent, car insurance and medical bills. She has managed to send a few checks to her mother in the Philippines, as she has done for the last two decades.
“I came here to work, and I devoted my life to this community,” she said, as tears streaked her cheeks. “This is our life that we have, and we cannot always rely on handouts.”
Ms. Bautista said she would spend her stimulus money stocking up on food and helping her children out with their bills. “We appreciate the help,” she said of the government aid. “Don’t get me wrong. We do appreciate that, but we cannot rely on it. We want job assurance.”
“If I have my job, I’m not going to be scared, because I know I can deal with all of this,” she added. “I’m going to have money to pay for my bills.”
Advertisement"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "The Trump administration announced plans Thursday to freeze fuel-efficiency requirements for the nation’s cars and trucks through 2026 — a massive regulatory rollback likely to spur a legal battle with California and other states, as well as create potential upheaval in the nation’s automotive market.
The proposal represents an abrupt reversal of the approach during the Obama administration, when regulators argued that requiring more-fuel-efficient vehicles would improve public health, combat climate change and save consumers money without compromising safety.
President Trump’s plan also would attempt to revoke California’s long-standing legal ability to set its own, more stringent tailpipe standards and restrict the ability of other states to follow its lead.
During the Obama administration, the federal government worked with California and the auto industry to craft a uniform set of national fuel-economy standards. The White House’s latest proposal threatens to blow up that delicate compromise.
If California were to prevail in the likely legal clash to come, the state could set tougher standards than the federal government, leaving automakers with the prospect of manufacturing vehicles that meet different rules in different states — something the industry has said it does not want.
On Thursday, a group of 19 attorneys general joined California Attorney General Xavier Becerra (D), who vowed that the state would “use every legal tool at its disposal to defend today’s national standards and reaffirm the facts and science behind them.”
California Gov. Jerry Brown (D) was more emphatic, saying his state “will fight this stupidity in every conceivable way possible.”
State leaders from both parties have backed California’s right to set its own tailpipe standards, and 13 states and the District of Columbia have adopted California’s standards in recent years.
“The reporting that we’re reversing Obama-era fuel-efficiency standards and preempting the tougher California standards is simply false,” White House spokeswoman Sarah Huckabee Sanders said Thursday, adding that the proposal released Thursday detailed a range of possible options in addition to the administration’s preferred path. “We’re simply opening it up for a comment period, and we’ll make a final decision at the end of that.”
Bill Wehrum, the Environmental Protection Agency’s assistant administrator for the Office of Air and Radiation, said officials in Washington and California had agreed earlier that once the proposal was made public, “we’re all going to get together again and begin talking in earnest about whether we can find that middle ground.”
The Trump administration’s proposal argues that forcing automakers to increase the fuel economy of their fleets to reach an average of roughly 54 miles per gallon by 2025, as the Obama administration proposed in 2012, would make new vehicles more expensive and encourage people to drive older, less-safe cars and trucks.
The new analysis, published jointly by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and the EPA, estimates that halting fuel-efficiency targets at 2020 levels could save $500 billion in “societal costs,” avert thousands of highway fatalities and save an estimated $2,340 on each new automobile.
It acknowledges that easing the Obama-era standards would increase U.S. fuel consumption by roughly half a million barrels of oil per day, an increase of 2 to 3 percent, and would lead to an increase in greenhouse-gas emissions.
Public-health experts and environmental groups condemned the White House proposal, arguing that it ignores the health benefits from less-polluting cars and would lead people to spend more money at the gas pump. They said the rollback would allow more carbon dioxide to spew from the nation’s vehicles, squandering a chance to combat climate change in the transportation sector, which has emerged as the nation’s largest source of carbon dioxide emissions.
“By 2030, the pollution equivalent of this rollback will be like firing up 30 coal power plants,” Paul Cort, a lawyer with the group Earthjustice, said in a statement. “It’s a boon for big oil that ordinary Americans will pay for with their health and their wallets.”
Some automakers have expressed unease about an abrupt freezing of fuel-economy standards and the specter of having to meet different requirements in different states. Industry representatives commended the Trump administration Thursday for putting out multiple options for public comment but stressed that they continue to support fuel-economy increases.
“With today’s release of the Administration’s proposals, it’s time for substantive negotiations to begin,” Gloria Bergquist, spokeswoman for the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, said in a statement. “We urge California and the federal government to find a common-sense solution that sets continued increases in vehicle efficiency standards while also meeting the needs of America’s drivers.”
Ross Eisenberg, vice president for energy and resources policy at the National Association of Manufacturers, said that while the industry wanted to revisit the Obama-era standards, “ultimately, manufacturers need a single national program that provides regulatory certainty and maintains vehicle affordability.”
Karl Brauer, executive publisher of Autotrader and Kelley Blue Book, said in a statement that the unpredictable outcome of the legal and regulatory wrangling ahead “will keep courtrooms busy and boardrooms nervous for the foreseeable future.”
The Trump administration’s push to ease fuel-economy standards got a warm reception from several Republican lawmakers and oil and gas interests.
“What started as a mandate in the mid-1970’s to reduce foreign imports of oil morphed into a costly and unworkable environmental regulation thanks to bureaucrats in the previous administration and in Sacramento,” Thomas J. Pyle, president of the free-market American Energy Alliance advocacy group, said in a statement. “President Trump should be commended for standing up for American consumers by reducing the regulatory burden placed unnecessarily on automakers.”
In recent years, as gas prices remained low, Americans have shown a clear preference for larger vehicles. Data shows that Ford’s F-series trucks are the best-selling vehicles in the United States, followed by Chevrolet and Ram pickups and a collection of SUVs. Further down the list are smaller vehicles such as the Honda Civic and Toyota Corolla.
Trump administration officials fought for weeks behind the scenes over the details of how to relax Obama-era standards. Top officials at the Transportation Department and the EPA clashed over whether the White House’s justifications for the new policy can stand up to legal scrutiny.
In one recent internal presentation, part of which was obtained by The Washington Post, officials at the EPA’s Office of Transportation and Air Quality warned that the proposal at that point contained “a wide range of errors, use of outdated data, and unsupported assumptions.”
Ultimately, the two agencies published Thursday’s proposal jointly, and acting EPA administrator Andrew Wheeler publicly defended the proposal this week, including during testimony before the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee.
Over thousands of pages, the administration proposal argues that the costs of meeting federal mileage requirements over the next few years would boost the sticker price of vehicles, prompting people to continue driving older cars and trucks rather than buying newer, more efficient ones. That would in turn increase the risk of accidents, it says.
EPA officials questioned some of those estimates, as well as the Transportation Department’s idea that officials could block California from imposing its own, tougher vehicle tailpipe standards on the grounds that a 1975 energy law reserved that right for the federal government.
One key proponent of the new plan is Deputy Transportation Secretary Jeffrey Rosen, who oversees the department’s deregulatory efforts. NHTSA Deputy Administrator Heidi King also helped scale back the fuel-efficiency regulations, which were among the Obama administration’s most significant climate-change initiatives.
“The unrealistic goals set in 2012 have to change to reflect the information available to us now,” King told reporters Thursday. Responding to a critique of the proposal’s foundations from some within the EPA, King said she encourages a “rigorous review” of the numbers used in the plan and noted that “it’s been a great pleasure” working with EPA and Transportation Department experts.
The administration argues that its proposal to freeze the fleetwide average of 37 miles per gallon in 2020 would prevent roughly 12,700 traffic fatalities in vehicles built through model year 2029. But some experts said those numbers appeared based on difficult-to-decipher analytical approaches.
Trump’s sparring over trade with Mexico, Canada and much of the rest of the world, his steel and aluminum tariffs and his threat to impose 25 percent auto-related tariffs have exacerbated automakers’ concerns. The automobile tariffs alone could add thousands of dollars to the price of a car, General Motors told regulators this month.
In 2016, the EPA estimated that complying with the tighter tailpipe standards would cost roughly $900 per car by 2025, with NHTSA putting the figure at $1,200. Two years later, Trump officials argue that keeping the Obama-era standards could raise costs by more than $2,300 per vehicle.
Last year, 37,150 people died on U.S. roads, and several factors contributed far more to that toll than any potential impact related to tailpipe regulations. More than half of all road deaths were connected to drunken driving or speeding, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The Trump administration said Thursday that it will accept public comment on its latest proposal for 60 days. NHTSA and the EPA plan to hold public hearings in Washington, Detroit and Los Angeles.
Read more
Trump administration to freeze fuel-efficiency standards and fight states
Official who crafted new car rules wouldn’t say whether humans cause climate change
EPA reverses course, says it will enforce new pollution limits for glider"
frame of article is: government
###
article: "CUMBERLAND, Ky. — Sitting in lawn chairs plopped in the middle of train tracks, two coal miners smoked and chewed tobacco to pass the time. There’s been little else to do here for the past four weeks, except wave at motorists who honk in support of these homegrown heroes waging a national struggle over workers’ rights.
Since Chris Rowe and Chris Sexton were laid off from their mining jobs this summer along with 300 co-workers, they have been camped out here in the mountains of eastern Kentucky, blocking a train car full of coal from going to market. Their protest is against coal company Blackjewel, which halted operations in July without settling its final salary obligations to Rowe, Sexton and an estimated 1,800 other workers across the country. But it’s also become a declaration against corporate bankruptcy laws that they say deprioritize workers’ interests.
“The same situation may have happened to others, but we are the ones making a stand,” said Rowe, 35, who was laid off days after he purchased his first house. “We mined the coal and broke our backs to get that coal, so that coal belongs to us until they pay for it.”
Blackjewel is part of the latest spate of coal producers to file for bankruptcy, a trend that has lingered under President Trump as the nation’s appetite for coal has continued to shrink. The Trump administration’s rollback of environmental regulations implemented under Obama have failed to spark a revival in communities like Cumberland that formed his political base during the 2016 election.
Cumberland is located in Harlan County, where Trump won 85 percent of the vote. But these miners say their fight isn’t a political one. At the camp, there is an informal policy against speaking about Trump or partisan issues, underscoring the president’s continued popularity in areas where the local economy has continued to suffer.
“That is the main reason we have gotten as far as we’ve got now; it’s because we have kept the nonsense down,” Rowe said, referring to the nation’s divisive political debate.
Although the number of Americans employed in the coal industry nationwide has remained relatively steady since Trump took office, analysts say the industry faces a rocky future as energy suppliers continue to shift toward renewable sources and relatively low-cost natural gas. Annual U.S. coal production is expected to drop from 711 million tons to less than 600 million tons during the next five years, said Gregory Marmon, a principal coal analyst at global consulting firm Wood Mackenzie.
“The administration has definitely pulled back regulations, and that has stopped some of the bleeding, but renewable energy is so cost-effective, and natural gas prices are so low, the pulling back of some regulations has not been able to stop the decline of coal,” Marmon said.
[In small towns across the nation, the death of a coal plant leaves an unmistakable void]
Blackjewel, which operated mines in Kentucky, Virginia, West Virginia and Wyoming, abruptly announced July 1 that it was shutting down operations. Paychecks bounced or were clawed out of miners’ accounts. Other paychecks were never issued.
“We had just bought a washer, and then the bank pulled the money back out, and it made our account negative,” said Stacy Rowe, Chris Rowe’s wife.
The effect of those missed paychecks has rippled through the county’s economy. Many of the miners made $20 to $30 an hour, a middle-class salary in a county where the household median income is $24,000 a year, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.
Upset that the product of his labor was about to leave town while his bank account showed a negative balance of $2,100, Sexton phoned Rowe and other miners to stop the coal train on July 29, an act of defiance that continues today.
After a tense standoff with Kentucky State Police troopers, the rail cars remained stationary and the miners were permitted to continue their protest. The workers have erected blue and white tarps along the rail tracks to create a makeshift kitchen, children’s playroom, and a space to collect donated clothes and canned goods. Portable toilets have been trucked in. Each night, miners pitch tents or sleep in their trucks to avoid the coyotes and black bears that pass these rail tracks parallel to a tributary of the Cumberland River named “Poor Fork.”
“If that train leaves, we ain’t got nothing,” said Sexton, 30, who said Blackjewel owes him about $5,000. “This is all we got left, because we mined it and still ain’t got paid for it.”
The Labor Department has sought an injunction to prevent Blackjewel from moving the rail car, which is estimated to have about $1 million in coal, according to local media reports.
Meanwhile, a team of attorneys is working to help the miners, who were not unionized, to secure back pay and other damages as part of bankruptcy proceedings. Sam Petsonk, a West Virginia attorney who is representing 1,100 of the laid-off employees, said the miners’ plight highlights the need to reform bankruptcy laws so employee wages and benefits are more highly prioritized in such legal proceedings.
Blackjewel is selling off mines as part of the bankruptcy proceedings and, in at least one case, “the buyer has committed to assume and pay outstanding employee obligations,” according to a statement from interim CEO David Beckman.
The previous chief executive, Jeffrey Hoops Sr., resigned on July 3.
“Blackjewel knows that each day that passes creates additional hardship for miners who have not yet been brought back to work and their families,” Beckman said. The company “continues to work tirelessly on finding ways to make all of the employees whole on their pre-petition wages.”
The protest has brought attention to the decline of labor unions across coal country, particularly in Harlan County, site of a violent uprising in the 1930s by coal miners who attempted to form a union. As mines shut down in recent decades, amid declining reserves and more stringent environmental regulations, they have been replaced with smaller, less labor-intensive operations that relied on nonunionized workers.
Now, there are no unionized coal mines in Kentucky, according to Phil Smith, the director of communications and government affairs for the United Mine Workers of America. Nationwide, just about a quarter of the nation’s 38,000 hourly coal miners are represented by the United Mine Workers, Smith added.
“These workers are showing how all workers are vulnerable to the efforts of corporations to deny them wages and benefits, but you can come together as a group and challenge it,” said William J. Londrigan, president of the Kentucky AFL-CIO.
[Rural Appalachia lags the rest of the country in infant mortality and life expectancy]
The fight has attracted national attention. Farmer Wayne Cryts drove 12 hours from Missouri to show support for the coal workers’ cause.
While visiting the camp last week, he told Sexton and Rowe that he made national headlines in the early 1980s when he nearly lost 31,000 bushels of soybeans after the company that stored it declared bankruptcy. With his crop tied up in court proceedings, Cryts and dozens of supporters tried to force their way into the grain elevator to retrieve his harvest. The move triggered a protracted legal battle that eventually landed Cryts in prison.
“I can tell you from experience, that coal is the only leverage you got,” said Cryts, who vowed to return if authorities try to forcibly break up the camp.
Meanwhile, all around them, storefronts are boarded up and signs advertising payday loans are affixed to power poles. Some Cumberland residents say their faith in the U.S. political system is being tested.
“It just feels like we are still waiting” for Trump’s vow to revive the economies of depressed communities, said Boe Montgomery, 59. “This town is just about done in, and they might as well just make it a lake.”
But Dan Mosley, the county executive, said the overall health of Harlan County’s economy had been on an upswing in recent years before the Blackjewel bankruptcy. The county had a 13 percent unemployment rate in January 2017, when Trump was sworn into office, but it had fallen to about 7 percent, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The unemployment rate surged back to 13 percent in July, according to the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
The closure of the Blackjewel mines shouldn’t be viewed as “an issue that affects the president in any way,” Mosley said.
“This is an issue of one failed company, and one failed executive who didn’t manage his company the right way,” said Mosley, a Democrat, who added the region also needs to continue diversifying its economy.
As he sat in the protest camp last week, holding his 9-month-old daughter, 29-year-old David Pratt said being laid off made him decide to go to college to get his nursing degree.
“I just started last Monday and decided to do it while I’m still young enough,” said Pratt, noting he’s now been laid off three times from three different coal companies over the past 11 years.
But many of the miners say they remain optimistic they will soon be able to return to work after Blackjewel’s Kentucky assets are sold off to a new owner.
If that happens, though, the miners believe their protest will have sent a powerful message to their new boss as well.
“Coal will make a comeback, maybe not a big comeback, but it will come back,” Rowe said. “And hopefully these companies will see guys are going to start standing up again.”"
frame of article is: industry
###
article: "Daily Business Briefing
+
14
%
+
12
Inflation
+
10
+
8
+6.8% in
November
+
6
+4.9%
without food
and energy
+
4
+
2
0
Year-over-year change in the
Consumer Price Index
–
2
’70
’80
’90
’00
’10
’20
+
14
%
Inflation
+
12
+
10
+
8
+6.8% in
November
+
6
+4.9%
without food
and energy
+
4
+
2
0
Year-over-year change in the Consumer Price Index
–
2
’70
’75
’80
’85
’90
’95
’00
’05
’10
’15
’20
Inflation jumped to the highest level in nearly 40 years, fresh data released on Friday showed, as supply chain disruptions, rapid consumer demand and rising housing costs combined to fuel the strongest inflationary burst in a generation.
The rising costs spell trouble for officials at the Federal Reserve and the White House, who are trying to calibrate policy at a moment when the labor market has yet to completely heal from the pandemic, but the risk that price increases could become more lasting is increasing.
The Consumer Price Index climbed by 6.8 percent in the year through November, the data showed, the fastest pace since 1982. After stripping out food and fuel, which can move around a lot from month to month, inflation climbed by 4.9 percent.
Prices were up 0.8 percent from October, according to the report. That’s slightly slower than the prior monthly increase, but still an unusually rapid pace.
The question is what happens next. Fed officials have become increasingly concerned about rising price — both because the uptick has lasted longer than expected and because it shows signs of broadening to areas less affected by the pandemic.
Earlier this year, prices increases were concentrated in goods. Used cars and couches were in demand as the pandemic changed people’s lifestyles, but factories around the world struggled to keep up with the surge in buying, in part because shutdowns tied to the virus upended production. Shipping routes and ports also became clogged as demand followed an atypical pattern, with too many U.S.-bound goods trying to leave Asia in particular.
Those disruptions were expected to be temporary. Instead, they have lasted for months, as demand for goods remains strong and because the virus continues to upend production.
As pandemic quirks persist, inflationary pressures are also broadening. That includes rental prices, which have surged after an initial slackening during the pandemic and are helping to push up overall price gains. It’s a worrying development for the Fed as it considers its next policy steps.
“Generally, the higher prices we’re seeing are related to the supply-and-demand imbalances that can be traced directly back to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy, but it’s also the case that price increases have spread much more broadly in the recent few months,” Jerome H. Powell, the Fed chair, said during congressional testimony late last month. “I think the risk of higher inflation has increased.”
Fed officials are closely watching what happens with wages — and with consumer inflation expectations — as they try to gauge when and how much inflation will fade. But they are also starting to acknowledge that they might have to react to rising prices.
Mr. Powell signaled last week that the Fed, which began cutting back on economic support last month, will discuss speeding up that process at its Dec. 14-15 meeting. Economists expect central bankers to announce a plan to slow down their monthly bond purchases fast enough so that the program ends several months earlier, putting Fed officials in a position to raise their benchmark interest rate, their more traditional and more powerful tool.
Friday’s data will keep policymakers on track to accelerate their plans to taper off bond purchases, said Alan Detmeister, a senior economist at UBS and former chief of the wages and prices division at the Fed Board in Washington.
“This is still an enormous — a very, very strong — number,” Mr. Detmeister said, explaining that while he expects inflation to moderate, it may take until the middle of next year for that to show up clearly in the year-over-year data. “It seems pretty clear that they’re going to speed up the taper,” he added.
Moving to the next step — raising rates — would make debt of all kinds, from mortgages to car and business loans, more expensive. That would likely slow spending and hiring, cooling off demand and weighing down buoyant housing costs. The combination could help to put a lid on price gains.
But it could also leave the country with a less competitive labor market. That could be bad if the millions of people who remain out of the labor market compared to before the pandemic — many of them because of child-care issues and other virus-tied concerns — decide to embark on a job hunt.
Even so, the Fed is wary of letting inflation rocket out of control. In the 1960s, the central bank failed to take sufficiently decisive action to tamp down rising prices. Inflation leapt out of control, rising to double-digit levels during the 1970s, and Paul Volcker, then the Fed chair, pushed interest rates up sharply to get things under control in the early 1980s.
The hit to demand caused a painful recession before it brought price gains to heel. The mistake, and its aftermath, has haunted central bankers’s nightmares ever since.
As housing and other day-to-day costs rise, workers may begin to ask for raises to help offset the financial blow. Employers are competing for laborers at a time when job openings far exceed the number of people actively looking for jobs, and wages are rising at a brisk pace. The Employment Cost Index, a measure the Fed watches closely, picked up notably in the three-month period that ended in September.
Increased pay has not been enough to fully offset inflation for most people: Wage gains are up sharply, especially for low earners, but are not rising quickly enough to keep up with the acceleration in prices.
And as companies that face rising input and labor costs seek to pass those on to consumers, it may actually help to keep prices rising.
Big companies are managing to remain profitable as parts from overseas and commodities like gas climb in price, in part because they are successfully handing off those costs to consumers. Profit margins for nonfinancial companies have been increasing at a brisk pace this year, including in some of the industries hardest-hit by supply problems.
“Inventories of automobiles continued to shrink, but dealers saw strong profits because of high prices of vehicles,” the Federal Reserve’s Beige Book, a collection of regional economic reports, noted from the Richmond district.
A jump in inflation in November was partly fueled by rising prices for food and rent, which have increasingly posed a challenge for consumers and policymakers in Washington.
A Labor Department report released on Friday showed that inflation jumped to the highest level in nearly 40 years, climbing by 6.8 percent in the year through November. The big number included a strong increase in food prices, which rose 6.1 percent from a year earlier, according to the Consumer Price Index report. The 0.7 increase in November came on the heels of several months of strong gains: The food index climbed 0.9 percent in October and September.
Rent also rose 0.4 percent last month, reflecting a tight housing market that is feeding into inflation. The surge in rent costs has stemmed from strong demand for owned homes and as people have searched for extra space but found that houses were in short supply.
The rise in prices puts pressure on the Federal Reserve, which is discussing whether to end its bond-buying program faster. That would put it in a position to start to lift interest rates, which the central bank has held at near zero since the beginning of the pandemic.
Inflation has continued to surge as supply chain disruptions, strong demand for goods and rising wages have pushed prices higher, complicating President Biden’s agenda and depressing his approval ratings.
Americans have felt the increase in prices, which has dented their finances and forced them to cut back in other ways. Consumers have grown more wary of the jump in costs, expressing less optimism about their personal finances and the overall growth of the economy, according to a recent University of Michigan survey.
Alan Detmeister, a senior economist at UBS who used to be chief of the wages and prices division at the Fed Board in Washington, said that rents would continue to move up substantially in the near term. But real-time trackers like Apartment List have showed some softening in recent readings, which could be a good sign that those pressures will cool off toward the middle of 2022.
“While we’re probably going to be seeing some strong rents for the near term, those are probably going to be slowing,” Mr. Detmeister said.
Jayson Lusk, an agricultural economist at Purdue University, said that food prices had increased as people’s savings rose during the pandemic. That has given them the ability to pay more, making them more willing to accept price increases. Companies in the food industry have also increased wages to attract more workers, and have tried to pass along those costs.
Dirk Van de Put, the chief executive of Mondelez International, told CNBC last month that the company — which makes Oreo cookies, Ritz crackers and Sour Patch Kids candy — expected to increase prices by 7 percent next year. The company has faced higher costs for commodities, packaging and transportation, he said.
“It is very difficult to keep our clients well-stocked,” he said. “Our on shelf availability is nowhere near where we would like it to be.”
Although millions of people have seen their savings grow, that has started to dwindle for many working- and middle-class households. Higher food costs have a disproportionate impact on lower-income people, who tend to spend more of their income on food, Mr. Lusk said.
Diana Madoshi, a retired nurse in Placer County, Calif. who relies on Social Security benefits, said that higher prices at the grocery store had started to burden her budget. A carton of eggs, which used to cost about $2.80 before the pandemic, now can cost nearly $4, she said.
To offset the amount she is paying for food, Ms. Madoshi said she had been taking fewer Uber rides to her doctor appointments, instead having her friends drive her. She said she had also cut back the amount of clothes she had been buying during the pandemic.
“This is just another harsh reality of what we’re going through right now,” said Ms. Madoshi, 75. “And there’s nothing I can do about that.”
Inflation’s surge in the United States has been driven in part by a substantial increase in energy and prices over the last year, although there has been some moderation in recent weeks.
According to the Consumer Price Index, the 12-month change in energy prices as of November was 33.3 percent, nearly five times the overall inflation rate.
The cost for gasoline moved higher by 6.1 percent last month — a burden for households, particularly as the holiday travel season begins — and by 58.1 percent in the last year.
Prices for fuel oil — which is used for industrial and home heating — rose 3.5 percent last month, though that rate was far tamer than October’s 12.3 percent increase. If that easing continues, it may provide some measure of relief for households bracing for crippling household winter heating bills, but fuel oil is still up 59.3 percent on a yearly basis.
In better news, electricity prices were up a more modest 0.3 percent last month — a break from October’s 1.8 percent increase, but still 6.5 percent higherthan a year earlier.
Unlike in some other commodity sectors, increased energy prices in the market are quickly passed through to consumers, who have become accustomed to cheaper energy prices in recent years and now find themselves rankled by the sudden pressure put on their budgets.
“Households are facing higher prices at every turn,” said Greg McBride, the chief financial analyst at Bankrate, a personal finance company. The recent jumps in energy, food and shelter, he said, “are putting a major squeeze on household budgets.” Those three expenses account for more than half of the weighting in the Consumer Price Index. Energy alone accounts for 7.5 percent.
Because energy and food prices are notoriously volatile, the government reports separate inflation figures, including and excluding those categories. Including all categories, the one-month rise in November was 6.8 percent; without food and energy, it was 4.9 percent.
The surge in consumer prices is likely to intensify debates in Washington over the continuation of uncomfortably high inflation numbers — especially for core expenses such as energy that households can’t go without — and how policymakers can address them.
Republicans in Congress and lobbying groups for the oil and gas industry have filleted the Biden White House for higher energy prices; however, nonpartisan industry researchers have noted the overall weak relationship between a given administration’s level of support for renewable fuels and the arc of fossil fuel prices.
The George W. Bush administration, for instance, was noted for its connections to the oil and gas industry, yet during Mr. Bush’s second term, energy prices were often higher than today. And the Obama administration — whose clean-energy initiatives were prominent — benefited from a private-sector fracking boom on its watch, which increased supply and made gas and home heating relatively cheap for years.
Good news about energy prices has been uncommon for consumers lately. But recent moves in the market have indicated that the weather may cut them at least a temporary break. Natural gas, used to heat almost half of U.S. households, almost doubled in price earlier this fall, but sank by more than 10 percent at one point this week after the release of government weather forecasts projecting a warmer-than-expected winter.
Several states have had some of their warmest December days on record. And according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Climate Prediction Center, above-average temperatures throughout the South and most of the East could predominate for most of this winter.
“If it’s a warmer winter, then our estimates about consumption will be down, and if consumption is down, that’ll reduce the price of the fuel,” said Mark Wolfe, the executive director of the National Energy Assistance Directors’ Association, a group of state officials that provide assistance to households in need. “It’s a good sign.”
Much like retail businesses, energy producers have had to wrestle with imbalances in the economy caused by the pandemic shock and a halting reopening of activity.
An analysis this month from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas noted that oil-field activity in the region had risen steadily over the last month and a half, but that “supply-chain delays worsened, with significantly larger backlogs, escalating costs, and material and equipment lead times as long as 10 months for some types of machinery.”
The Labor Department’s announcement on Friday that the Consumer Price Index rose 0.8 percent in November and 6.8 percent from the year before is the latest sign of rapid price increases eroding President Biden’s approval ratings on the economy and threatening the expansive economic and climate legislation he is trying to push through Congress by the end of the year.
Voters and a crucial Democrat in the Senate, Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, have become increasingly concerned with the rising inflation that now ranks as America’s fastest annual price growth in four decades. A string of recent polls show inflation now ranks as the top economic concern nationwide, a product of rising costs for gasoline, food and a variety of goods that Americans have bought in droves as the country emerges from the pandemic recession.
Mr. Manchin is a centrist who looms as the most likely Democrat to vote against Mr. Biden’s $2.2 trillion legislation, which the president is trying to pass along party lines, given Republicans have no intention of voting for the bill. Mr. Biden will need every Democrat in the Senate to support the measure for it to pass. Mr. Manchin has in recent days repeated his fear that the spending in the bill, which includes initiatives to fight climate change and invest in children, parents and workers, could exacerbate price increases further — a claim that administration officials and Mr. Biden say is unfounded.
The president has attempted in recent weeks to balance his efforts to cast the recovery as strong — citing job gains, falling unemployment claims, nominal wage growth and the fastest economic growth since the mid-1980s — with acknowledgment that inflation has hurt American families’ wallets. And he has stressed the actions his administration has taken to unclog supply chains that are contributing to price increases.
In a statement on Friday, Mr. Biden said the data did not reflect more recent trends, which he said showed prices moving down for cars and gasoline, among others.
“Today’s numbers reflect the pressures that economies around the world are facing as we emerge from a global pandemic — prices are rising,” he said. “But developments in the weeks after these data were collected last month show that price and cost increase are slowing, although not as quickly as we’d like.”
“Even with this progress,” Mr. Biden added, “price increases continue to squeeze family budgets. We are making progress on pandemic-related challenges to our supply chain which make it more expensive to get goods on shelves, and I expect more progress on that in the weeks ahead.”
Mr. Biden’s aides have said throughout the year that the expect the current bout of inflation to fade quickly, as supply chain issues work themselves out and the world continues to emerge from the pandemic. Those predictions have frequently proven overly optimistic. But administration officials made another round of them this week ahead of the Labor Department release, saying they expected the drivers of inflation, like rising prices for used cars, to prove temporary and the rate of inflation to fall sharply in the first half of 2022.
Administration officials also say they already see signs that other main drivers of price increases, like gasoline, are cooling off. Energy prices were up 33 percent from a year ago in the November report, and gasoline prices were up 58 percent. But the cost of a gallon at the pump began to fall in recent weeks, and so has the cost of natural gas.
Republican lawmakers on Friday continued to point fingers at Mr. Biden for the rising costs and said Democrats would exacerbate inflation with their $2.2 trillion spending bill.
“Senate Democrats should suspend any consideration of Biden’s inflation-driving Build Back Better spending binge until the president can demonstrate he can get inflation under control,” Representative Kevin Brady, Republican of Texas and ranking member on the House Ways and Means Committee, said in a statement.
Stocks on Wall Street jumped on Friday, with the S&P 500 on track for its best week since February, after inflation report that showed consumer prices were rising fast but was nevertheless in line with economists expectations.
The S&P 500 rose 0.7 percent in early trading, while the Nasdaq composite gained 1 percent. The S&P 500 has been rebounding this week, as concerns about the Omicron variant of the coronavirus eased somewhat even as it continues to spread. The benchmark index is poised to close the week with a gain of more than 3 percent, within striking distance of a record.
The gains on Friday came despite a Labor Department report that showed the Consumer Price Index rose at the fastest pace in nearly 40 years, up by 6.8 percent last month compared with a year earlier. The inflation measure rose 0.8 percent from October, which is a slightly slower rate in month-to-month increases.
Officials at the Federal Reserve officials have been watching inflation data closely for the past several months, and signaled that the bank was ready to speed up its pullback on monetary policy stimulus that had helped support the economy since the pandemic started. The latest data adds to concerns that what was initially a burst of reopening-driven inflation could linger longer than policymakers first expected.
Jerome H. Powell, the Federal Reserve chair, has said he expects central bank officials to address slowing bond purchases faster when they meet next week. Officials announced plans to slow those purchases by $15 billion a month, which would have the program ending midway through 2022.
Ending those purchases would set the stage for interest rate increases, the Fed’s most powerful tool to cool down the economy.
An oil project off the coast of Scotland that had become a test of Britain’s environmental credentials was shelved by its main owner on Friday.
The decision to halt Cambo, as the oil field is known, is a huge win for environmental groups like Greenpeace, and a blow to the North Sea oil industry. It comes just over a week after Shell, which owns 30 percent of the project, pulled out of the investment.
“We are pausing the development while we evaluate next steps,” said Siccar Point Energy, a London-based company that is backed by private equity firms, including Blackstone, the financial management giant.
Siccar Point said it had planned to invest $2.6 billion in Cambo, and had already spent $190 million on the field since acquiring it in 2017. The firm said that developing Cambo, a potentially valuable source of oil and natural gas, would have created 1,000 jobs.
Environmental groups, on the other hand, said that starting new drilling projects was not compatible with Britain’s goals on tackling climate change and reaching net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. The British government has been considering whether to let Cambo go ahead.
Located northwest of Scotland’s Shetland Islands, Cambo became a target of protests, including at the recent United Nations climate summit in Glasgow. Scotland’s top politician, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon, has said she did not think it should be given a green light.
On Dec. 2, Shell said it would not go ahead with investment because the economic case was not strong enough.
Shell’s decision, which was also prompted by the potential for delays from protests and lawsuits, led Siccar Point to decide it could not “progress on the originally planned time scale,” the firm said.
The U.S. stock market has been on a run, with the S&P 500 up nearly 4 percent so far this week, and more than 25 percent for the year. Fears about the Omicron variant of the coronavirus quickly faded, with stocks regaining lost ground.
This makes some market watchers nervous, the DealBook newsletter reports, because of a metric that suggests that stock prices may be too high given the level of corporate earnings and rising inflation.
The S&P 500 now has a real earnings yield — the inflation-adjusted ratio of earnings per share to the stock price — approaching negative 3 percent, the lowest since 1947, Bank of America equity strategists led by Savita Subramanian wrote in a recent note to clients. Negative yields are rare and often precede a stock market slump, the analysts wrote.
A low earnings yield means that corporate profits are not keeping up with stock prices. And because real yields subtract inflation from the measure, a negative real earnings yield means that a company, based on its stock price, is not generating enough profits to keep up with rising prices. (Using October’s inflation number, Tesla’s real earnings yield is negative 5.2 percent.)
The last time the S&P 500 had a negative real earnings yield, the Bank of America analysts said, was in 2000, before the tech bubble burst. It also happened twice during the stagflation of the 1970s and ’80s. This year, the S&P 500’s real earnings yield turned negative months ago, but it really sank recently as inflation has marched higher.
Besides a bear market, there are two ways a negative earnings yield can turn positive:
First, inflation would have to drop significantly, which some economists think is possible.
Second, at a time when wages are rising and supply issues are interfering with plans, corporate profits could accelerate faster than expected.
After the initial shock of the pandemic, stocks have shrugged off negative news and set a series of records. But the more that analysts consider the numbers, the more they worry that the gravity-defying rise may not last much longer. (Stocks fell on Thursday.)
That said, “we live in a world where real negative rates are almost acceptable as a norm,” Ms. Subramanian noted.
The Securities and Exchange Commission’s chair, Gary Gensler, has made clear for months that he is worried about the risks faced by investors in special purpose acquisition companies, which over the past two years have become a hugely popular way to take businesses public.
In a speech on Thursday, he elaborated on one of the S.E.C.’s main focuses in reducing those risks — with measures that could shake up the industry, the DealBook newsletter reports.
Mr. Gensler noted that SPACs are allowed to pitch potential investors using forward-looking business data that isn’t allowed in initial public offerings. That loophole, he said, allows the financiers behind these funds to release rosy-looking numbers that mask the underlying health of the business they’re taking public. (The S.E.C. has been looking into disclosure issues in SPAC deals involving the likes of Nikola and Lucid.)
It now looks as if the S.E.C. may require SPACs to provide more complete disclosures about their deals, and to do so earlier: “It is essential that investors receive the information they need, when they need it, without misleading hype,” Mr. Gensler said.
He also suggested that the people behind SPACs, including their sponsors, financial advisers and accountants, should be held more accountable for their due diligence on the companies these funds acquire, much as underwriters of I.P.O.s are. “Make no mistake: When it comes to liability, SPACs do not provide a ‘free pass’ for gatekeepers,” he said in his speech.
The goal is to even out the playing field between SPACs and I.P.O.s. Deal makers have expected financial regulators to tighten the rules governing blank-check funds, amid an explosion in their popularity and the underperformance of many companies that have used them to go public, but Mr. Gensler’s comments shed further light on what that might look like.
Daimler’s car and truck divisions concluded an amicable divorce on Friday when shares in Daimler Truck began trading separately on the Frankfurt stock exchange.
The separation of Mercedes-Benz, the luxury carmaker, from Daimler Truck, which owns Freightliner in the United States, signaled the end of an era not only for Daimler but also the German economy.
The spinoff, announced in February, was the final chapter in a transition that began in the 1990s, when Daimler was a sprawling conglomerate that also made trains and passenger aircraft. Along with other industrial empires like Siemens, Daimler has been forced to jettison excess baggage to remain competitive.
For car and truck makers, the need to ditch unwieldy corporate structures has become even more urgent as they try to survive the shift to emission-free propulsion. One justification for the spinoff is that it will allow Daimler Truck’s managers to make decisions more quickly.
Daimler Truck is betting on hydrogen fuel cells for long-haul trucks, in contrast to competitors like Scania that favor batteries. It is not yet clear which technology will prevail.
A few decades ago, many German companies operated on the principle that bigger was better. That might have made sense when capital was harder to come by, said Martin Daum, the chief executive of Daimler Truck, because the more profitable parts of a conglomerate could generate cash for struggling units.
“We had globally very inefficient capital markets,” Mr. Daum said in an interview. “That supported the buildup of conglomerates.”
“Today, every business that has a compelling idea can raise money,” he said.
Whether Daimler Truck has compelling ideas will now be put to the test. The shares opened Friday at 28 euros (about $31.60) and rose as much as 8.5 percent, valuing the company at about $27 billion.
The new company is the largest truck maker in the United States by way of its Freightliner brand. Globally, Daimler Truck is also the largest maker of buses. Its other brands include Mercedes-Benz trucks and buses sold primarily in Europe and Fuso trucks sold in Asia.
Daimler Truck and Mercedes-Benz luxury cars will remain closely connected. Daimler, the parent company of Mercedes, will retain a 35 percent stake in Daimler Truck. The remaining shares will be distributed to Daimler shareholders.
BNP Paribas, Citigroup and Goldman Sachs are serving as listing agents for the spinoff."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "BENTONVILLE, Ark. — A couple of years ago, Walmart, which once built its entire branding around a big yellow smiley face, was creating more than its share of frowns.
Shoppers were fed up. They complained of dirty bathrooms, empty shelves, endless checkout lines and impossible-to-find employees. Only 16 percent of stores were meeting the company’s customer service goals.
The dissatisfaction showed up where it counts. Sales at stores open at least a year fell for five straight quarters; the company’s revenue fell for the first time in Walmart’s 45-year run as a public company in 2015 (currency fluctuations were a big factor, too).
To fix it, executives came up with what, for Walmart, counted as a revolutionary idea. This is, after all, a company famous for squeezing pennies so successfully that labor groups accuse it of depressing wages across the American economy. As an efficient, multinational selling machine, the company had a reputation for treating employee pay as a cost to be minimized.Continue reading the main story
But in early 2015, Walmart announced it would actually pay its workers more.
That set in motion the biggest test imaginable of a basic argument that has consumed ivory-tower economists, union-hall organizers and corporate executives for years on end: What if paying workers more, training them better and offering better opportunities for advancement can actually make a company more profitable, rather than less?
It is an idea that flies in the face of the prevailing ethos on Wall Street and in many executive suites the last few decades. But there is sound economic theory behind the idea. “Efficiency wages” is the term that economists — who excel at giving complex names to obvious ideas — use for the notion that employers who pay workers more than the going rate will get more loyal, harder-working, more productive employees in return.
Walmart’s experiment holds some surprising lessons for the American economy as a whole. Productivity gains have been slow for years; could fatter paychecks reverse that? Demand for goods and services has remained stubbornly low ever since the 2008 economic crisis. If companies paid people more, would it bring out more shoppers — benefiting workers and shareholders alike?
Deep in a warren of windowless offices here, executives in early 2015 sketched out a plan to spend more money on increased wages and training, and offer more predictable scheduling. They refer to this plan as “the investments.”
The results are promising. By early 2016, the proportion of stores hitting their targeted customer-service ratings had rebounded to 75 percent. Sales are rising again.
That said, the immediate impact on earnings and the company’s stock price have been less rosy.
The question for Walmart is ultimately whether that short-run hit makes the company a stronger competitor in the long run. Will the investments turn out to be the beginning of a change in how Walmart and other giant companies think about their workers, or just a one-off experiment to be reversed when the next recession rolls around?
The future health of the United States economy, and the well-being of its workers, may well depend on the answer.
Pressure From Investors
On the morning of Feb. 19, 2015, Walmart’s 1.2 million employees across the United States gathered — many in front of their stores’ vast walls of televisions for sale — to watch a video feed by their chief executive. Doug McMillon, wearing a sweater and sitting in the office once occupied by the company founder Sam Walton, more or less acknowledged that Walmart had made a mistake. It had gone too far in trying to cut payroll costs to the bone.
“Sometimes we don’t get it all right,” Mr. McMillon said in the video. “Sometimes we make policy changes or other decisions and they don’t result in what we thought they were going to. And when we don’t get it right, we adjust.”
What most store employees probably didn’t know was that Mr. McMillon and his executive team, who had been promoted into their jobs a year earlier, were under extraordinary pressure from investors. They needed to reverse a slide in business and fight off threats in all directions — dollar discounters on the low end, Amazon online, direct competitors like Target and countless rivals specializing in one slice of Walmart’s business, from grocery chains to home-improvement warehouses.
People were shopping more — at Walmart’s rivals.
The company offers its millions of shoppers a simple way to make their dissatisfaction known. On the back of sales receipts is a message, “Tell us about your visit today,” along with instructions to log on to a website and answer questions about the store: Was it clean? Were they able to get what they came for quickly? Were employees friendly?
In early 2015, the answers that poured into Walmart’s global headquarters were, in a word, awful. The people paid to analyze the company tended to agree, too. A report by analysts at Wolfe Research in 2014 included photographs from a visit to Walmart of a sad-looking display of nearly empty bins of oranges and lemons and disorganized shelves of crackers.
“Walmart U.S.’s relentless focus on costs does seem to have taken some toll on in-store conditions and stock levels,” they wrote. The analysts wryly added: “If an item is not on the shelf, you cannot sell it.”
The company had been busy raising profits by cutting labor costs. The number of employees in the United States fell by 7 percent from early 2008 to early 2013, for example, a span in which the square footage of stores rose 13 percent.
Some of that reflects technological advances, like self-checkout kiosks. But when Mr. McMillon and a new team came in to reverse the slide starting in early 2014, they diagnosed the problem as having taken the cost-cutting logic too far.
From store managers nationwide, they heard that years of cost-cutting meant Walmart had become viewed as a last-ditch option for employment — not the place that ambitious people might want to work. They were under such pressure to keep labor costs low that the employees they hired showed little loyalty or career-building devotion to their jobs.
“We realized quickly that wages are only one part of it, that what also matters are the schedules we give people, the hours that they work, the training we give them, the opportunities you provide them,” said Judith McKenna, who became chief operating officer in late 2014, in a recent interview. “What you’ve got to do is not just fix one part, but get all of these things moving together.”
That is how Walmart decided to build 200 training centers to offer a clearer path for hourly employees who want to get on the higher-paying management track. And it said it would raise its hourly pay to a minimum of $10 for workers who complete a training course and raise department manager pay to $15 an hour, from $12. It said it would offer more flexible and predictable schedules to hourly workers.
The news from Bentonville made headlines worldwide. The federal minimum wage had been $7.25 since 2009, and the labor market had awarded meager pay gains for people at the lower end of the spectrum for decade, facts that helped increase Walmart’s bottom line. Now, the United States’ largest private employer — Walmart has about 2.3 million workers around the world — was signaling it was about to gingerly try a different approach, putting $2.7 billion where its mouth was.
Walmart says its average pay for a full-time nonmanagerial employee is now $13.69 an hour, up 16 percent since early 2014. In the same span, consumer prices have risen 2.1 percent.
Back to the Classroom
On a Thursday morning in late summer, at a Walmart Supercenter No. 359 in Fayetteville, Walmart trainees followed instructors around to learn what this particular store was doing right, and wrong, on this particular day. Teresa Rasberry praised a display of University of Arkansas tailgating equipment — coolers, grills and folding chairs — complemented by a fluttering effect created by putting electric fans beneath overhead banners for Razorbacks football.
“See how it pulls the eye?” she asked the trainees. “Step back and think about how the customer sees it.”
Not so good was an end display of Mr. Clean, in which the various colors of the cleaning solution were jumbled together. Lining up the bottles so they make vertical stripes of color pulls more buyers in, she said.
“It may sound silly,” Ms. Rasberry said, “but it works! I’ve tested it myself!”
Back in a classroom, Walmart department managers discussed why a $15.86 bottle of Clairol hair coloring might be a bad fit for a store located in a place with an $80,000 average income. Women in that income bracket are more likely to get their hair colored at a salon, an instructor, Amanda Forslund, explained.
This is one of the first of Walmart’s planned 200 training academies. New department managers will come in for two weeks of training covering general retail principles (customer service, inventory management) as well as specialized training for their specific area (the bakery or electronics, for example).
Walmart’s pay increases got most of the attention. But the new training and prospect of better career paths for hourly staff members could be more significant in the long term.
It’s not that the retail industry doesn’t offer potential paths to good incomes. Starting pay for an assistant store manager at Walmart is $48,500, and the manager of one of its large stores can make comfortably above $100,000.
The problem — described by Walmart managers and people outside the company who study labor markets — is that there is no clear path for an entry-level worker to get there. Much training is impromptu, and chains have tended to view their hourly workers as interchangeable cogs rather than resources worth investing in.
That reputation has been particularly strong at Walmart.
“I didn’t used to think this would be something I would want to do, to work at Walmart,” said Garrett Watts, a 22-year-old newly promoted customer service manager at a store in Fayetteville. “There’s a stigma with it. It used to be, if you worked at a Walmart, it was the equivalent of a fast-food restaurant.”
He had gone to college for two years, suspended his education and was working as a desk clerk at a hotel when he switched to Walmart this year, lured not by the starting wage but by what he had heard from a friend about the potential to rise within a giant company. He was soon promoted to department manager and runs customer services for the store. He was hired at $9 an hour and now makes $13.
“I wanted something that wasn’t a stopgap, but could be a real career,” Mr. Watts said. He is starting to set his sights on one of those $48,000-a-year assistant store manager jobs.
‘Step in the Right Direction’
Walmart’s announcement of what it refers to as “the investments,” made during the all-staff videoconference in 2015, became something of a Rorschach test. To macroeconomists, it suggested that a falling unemployment rate was finally creating the response that theory suggests it should: employers raising wages to attract the workers they need.
To labor activists, it was a sign that political campaigns to raise the minimum wage were paying off. To Wall Street analysts, it was the company owning up to the weaknesses long apparent in customer surveys and sales numbers.
And in the company’s own framing, it was about doing the right thing. “It’s clear to me that one of the highest priorities today must be an investment in you, our associates,” Mr. McMillon said in the video.
It was all of these things, Ms. McKenna acknowledged.
The improving economy made it harder for Walmart to get good workers without paying more. Political momentum toward a higher minimum wage meant that entry-level pay would soon be rising in many places anyway. And executives really had concluded that customer service woes and slumping sales were because of underinvestment in employees.
To some critics, though, it still amounted to a half-measure, and one framed to maximize public attention. “In our minds this is certainly a step in the right direction, but it’s typical Walmart in that it’s minimal and there’s a lot of spin on top of what’s really happening,” said Daniel Schlademan, a founder of the labor group Our Walmart, which wants the company to have a starting wage of $15 an hour.
In particular, new hires typically do not receive the $10 minimum wage until they finish a training program that is supposed to take six months but frequently stretches longer. And a promised increase in the predictability and flexibility of hourly workers’ schedules is being tested in only 650 smaller “neighborhood market” stores. It has not been rolled out to the full 4,500 Walmarts.
“The economic reality is that they put a great deal of pressure on managers to keep labor costs and hours down,” Mr. Schlademan said.
And the actions far well short of what Zeynep Ton, an associate professor of operations at the Sloan School of Business at M.I.T., calls a “good jobs strategy,” in which a retailer builds its entire operating philosophy around better-compensated staff members who are empowered to make decisions. Companies like Costco and the grocer Wegman’s have a base pay closer to that of what the retail activists seek and are successful by many measures. (Costco pays entry-level workers at least $13 an hour, with hourly pay reaching up to $22.50).
But while Walmart’s changes aren’t as extensive as advocates would prefer, the company has shifted, in relative terms, up the industry’s pay scale. In early 2014, Walmart’s self-reported average full-time pay was 3.7 percent higher than the average hourly earnings for nonmanagerial workers at general merchandise stores calculated by the Labor Department. Now, it is 13.7 percent higher.
“It’s about being competitive in the market and making sure the talent pool of applicants was the right talent pool,” Ms. McKenna said.
That sounds an awful lot like a reference to the concept of an “efficiency wage.”
Above the Market Rate
The idea is that, sometimes, it is in an employer’s best interest to pay more than necessary to get a worker into a job. The 18th-century economic thinker Adam Smith described the need to pay a goldsmith particularly well to dissuade him from stealing from you. More recently, economists (including Janet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman, who worked on these topics as an academic economist in the 1980s) have found evidence that people are more productive when they are paid above the market rate.
An employee making more than the market rate, after all, is likely to work harder and show greater loyalty. Workers who see opportunities to get promoted have an incentive not to mess up, compared with people who feel they are in a dead-end job. A person has more incentive to work hard, even when the boss isn’t watching, when the job pays better than what you could make down the street.
Economists have found evidence of this in practice in many real-world settings. Higher pay at New Jersey police departments, for example, led to better rates of clearing cases. At the San Francisco airport, higher pay led to shorter lines for passengers. Among British home care providers, higher pay meant less oversight was needed.
What is interesting about this is that, if you look at what’s ailing the broader United States economy, it looks a lot like what you would expect if employers were, en masse, failing to understand the possibility of efficiency wages.
Employers have succeeded at holding down labor costs. The “labor share” of national income — the portion of the national economic pie that goes to workers’ pay, as opposed to corporate profits and elsewhere — has fallen. And average pay for nonmanagerial workers has grown more slowly than the overall economy.
This has coincided with disappointing results for the economy. Worker productivity has been rising slowly for the last decade, and prime working-age Americans are staying out of the work force in droves. This implies that plenty of people don’t see jobs out there that offer sufficient pay or opportunity to make the jobs worth doing.
Individually, employers may think they are making rational decisions to pay people as little as possible. But that may be collectively shortsighted, if the unintended result is less demand for the goods and services they are all trying to sell to these same people.
Just maybe, in other words, employers across the country are pushing down labor costs like Walmart, circa 2014 — and this is one of the major culprits behind disappointing economic results since the start of the 21st century.
“The management philosophy that became popular in the 1980s that led companies to cut pay for low-wage workers, fight unions and contract out work may have been profitable for the companies that practiced it in the short run,” said Alan Krueger, a Princeton economist and leading scholar of labor markets. “But in the long run it has raised inequality, reduced aggregate consumption and hurt overall business profitability.”
Customer Surveys Improve
If you buy that theory — and, to be clear, it is more theory than settled fact — it means that the results of the Walmart experiment matter a great deal. That implies that if large companies were to spend more to pay and train their workers, it could create gains for the economy as a whole. And it would ultimately be better for those same businesses.
So, 19 months in, what is Walmart finding?
Those customer surveys that were so terrible at the start of 2015 have improved, with “clean, fast, friendly scores” rising for 90 consecutive weeks. Surveys by outside groups, like the investment banker Cowen & Company, point to more satisfied customers as well.
That seems to have done the trick in reversing the sales slump. At stores open at least a year, sales were up 1.6 percent over a year earlier in the most recent quarter. That’s better than it sounds. Overall sales at general merchandise retailers are down 0.4 percent this year compared with last, according to census data.
The profit landscape is less sunny. Operating income for Walmart’s United States stores was down 6 percent in the most recent quarter, reflecting higher labor costs and other new investments. The company’s stock has underperformed the overall United States stock market and an index of major retailers since the program was announced, suggesting investors are not convinced that these investments will pay a lucrative return anytime soon.
But at the store level, managers describe a big shift in the kind of workers they can bring in by offering $10 an hour with a solid path to $15 an hour. “We’re attracting a different type of associate,” said Tina Budnaitis, the manager of Walmart No. 5260 in Rogers. “We get more people coming in who want a career instead of a job.”
Senior executives speak in the language you might expect from a manager worried about paying an efficiency wage. “Our associates are an asset,” said Ms. McKenna, the chief operating officer. “You don’t try to have the very lowest cost of an asset. You try to have the right asset. So rather than thinking about the lowest cost, the question is how do you get the best productivity.”
The question for Walmart, and perhaps the economy as a whole, is whether these changes turn out to be one-off, or part of a shifting philosophy of how work and compensation should work in a 21st-century megacorporation.
“Out of the gate, they’ve seen some improvement, but I think that’s because they were doing Retail 101 so poorly,” said Brian Yarbrough, a retail analyst at Edward Jones & Company. “The better question is what happens next year and the following year. The low-hanging fruit has been harvested.”
Ms. McKenna declined to be specific about what might come next. And of course in a volatile corporate world, an unexpected recession or management change, or rise of a new competitor, could upend any plans. But she suggests that the company’s changes should not be viewed as a one-time event.
“This is a journey,” she said.
In the short term, the Walmart experiment shows pretty clearly that paying people better improves both the work force and the shoppers’ experience, but not profitability, at least not yet.
Still, here is one other nugget the company has found. The extra wages it is paying its workers don’t all go out the door on payday, executives said. Spending at the stores by employees has risen — offering a possible metaphor for what those efficiency-wage economists argue might happen across the economy, if wages were to climb.Continue reading the main story"
frame of article is: business
###
article: "Daily Business Briefing
Target plans to cut prices and cancel orders to clear out unwanted inventory, announcing a series of steps on Tuesday to combat inflation and supply chain disruptions. The actions would cut its profit in the current quarter, the company said, pushing its shares down.
It is the latest move by a major retailer revealing how inflation and shifts in consumer habits are swiftly changing the outlook for business. Just three weeks ago, Target shocked investors with earnings that were much worse than expected, leading its shares to fall nearly 25 percent. It cut its forecast for profit then, and lowered it even further on Tuesday.
Target, like many retailers that faced skyrocketing demand in the early months of the pandemic, stocked up on goods as snarled supply chains delayed shipments. But consumers are now turning away from goods like furniture, appliances and other products for staying home and shifting to spending more on experiences and going out.
Target’s ballooning inventory reflects a mix of merchandise that hasn’t — or can’t, for supply chain reasons — keep up with this shift. “Trends have changed rapidly since the beginning of the year,” the company said in its statement. It said it planned to add storage capacity near ports to hold more goods and open more distribution centers to “add flexibility and speed” in its supply chain.
“It’s certainly a surprise,” said Michael Baker, a managing director and senior retail analyst at D.A. Davidson. “Not only were they over-inventoried — a lot of their competitors were over-inventoried as well, and that’s what they misjudged,” he said. Because other big-box stores were now also trying to slash inventory, Target is “going to have to be aggressive with markdowns,” he added.
Even President Biden weighed in on Target’s travails, saying in a statement mostly about the trade deficit that “one of the nation’s largest retailers announced that it will take swift action to lower prices for certain goods,” playing up the potential effect that the company’s markdowns may have on reducing stubbornly high inflation. (He left unsaid the impact on Target’s profit margins.)
Target’s warning on Tuesday follows its disappointing earnings report last month, in which an unexpectedly large rise in inventory played a role. That came shortly after Walmart announced similarly downbeat earnings, dented by higher labor and fuel costs. Those reports helped spark a decline in the S&P 500 that dragged it down briefly into bear market territory, defined as a fall of 20 percent from a recent peak.
Stocks have recovered somewhat since then, and on Tuesday the markets appeared more resilient than they were when Target announced its earlier profit warning: After an initial wobble, the S&P 500 traded slightly up in early afternoon trading. Mr. Baker sensed a hint of optimism in investors’ reaction, with Target’s stock avoiding the nosedive it took before, and the broader market seemingly taking the news in stride.
There have also been some promising signs for retailers: Discounters and brands that serve higher-income shoppers have recently reported earnings that beat Wall Street’s expectations, suggesting that companies in the middle are most at risk of getting squeezed. Dollar Tree and Dollar General upgraded their forecasts for the year as shoppers sought lower prices and traded down from more expensive brands. At the same time, Nordstrom said that shoppers were updating their wardrobes with clothes for “long-awaited occasions” and Macy’s said that sales of luxury goods were strong.
For large and small nations around the globe, the hope of averting a recession is fading, the World Bank warned on Tuesday.
The grinding war in Ukraine, ongoing supply chain chokeholds, Covid-related lockdowns in China and dizzying rises in energy and food prices are battering economies all along the income ladder, saddling them with slower growth and surging inflation.
This suite of problems is “hammering growth,” David Malpass, president of the World Bank, said in a statement. “For many countries, recession will be hard to avoid.”
Global growth is expected to slow to 2.9 percent this year from 5.7 percent in 2021. The outlook, delivered in the bank’s latest Global Economic Prospects report, is not only grimmer than one produced six months ago, before war erupted in Ukraine, but also below the 3.6 percent forecast in April by the International Monetary Fund.
Growth is expected to remain muted in 2023. Growth for the 2020s is expected to fall below the average achieved in the previous decade, the report said.
Other than a handful of oil exporting nations like Saudi Arabia, which are benefiting from prices of more than $100 a barrel, there is a barely a spot on the globe that has not seen its prospects dim. Among the most advanced economies like the United States and Europe, growth is forecast to slow to 2.5 percent this year. China’s growth is projected to fall to 4.3 percent from 8.1 percent in 2021.
Russia’s economy is expected to contract by 8.9 percent — a hefty reduction, but still smaller than predictions by other forecasters.
Emerging nations will face the hardest setback, where the blows from the pandemic and the Ukraine war are still reverberating. The poorest nations will grow poorer.
Per capita income in developing economies will fall 5 percent below where it was headed before the pandemic hit, the report said. At the same time, government debt loads are increasing, a burden that will grow heavier as interest rates increase. Roughly 75 million more people will face extreme poverty than were expected before the pandemic.
In some ways, the economic threats mirror those faced in the 1970s, when spiraling oil shocks followed by rising interest rates caused a paralyzing stagflation, the bank said. That combination of events triggered a series of financial crises that rocked developing nations, resulting in what was known as a “lost decade” of growth.
The bank, which provides financial support to low- and middle-income nations, reiterated its familiar basket of remedies that include limiting government spending, using interest rates to dampen inflation and avoiding trade restrictions and subsidies. It also said that public spending should give priority to protecting the most vulnerable people.
That protection includes ensuring that low-income countries have sufficient supplies of Covid vaccines.
WASHINGTON — At her confirmation hearing in early 2021, Treasury Secretary Janet L. Yellen told lawmakers that it was time to “act big” on a pandemic relief package, playing down concerns about deficits at a time of perpetually low interest rates and warning that inaction could mean widespread economic “scarring.”
A year and a half later, prices are soaring and interest rates are marching higher. As a result, Ms. Yellen’s role in crafting and selling the $1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan, which Congress passed in March of last year, is being parsed amid an intensifying blame game to determine who is responsible for the highest rates of inflation in 40 years. After months of pinning rising prices on temporary supply chain problems that would dissipate, Ms. Yellen acknowledged last week that she had gotten it “wrong,” putting the Biden administration on the defensive and thrusting herself into the middle of a political storm.
“I think I was wrong then about the path that inflation would take,” Ms. Yellen said in an interview with CNN, adding that the economy had faced unanticipated “shocks” that increased food and energy prices.
Republican lawmakers, who have spent months blaming President Biden and Democrats for rising prices, gleefully seized upon the admission as evidence that the administration had mismanaged the economy and should not be trusted to remain in political control.
The Treasury Department has scrambled to clarify Ms. Yellen’s remarks, saying her acknowledgment that she misread inflation simply meant that she could not have foreseen developments such as the war in Ukraine, new variants of the coronavirus or lockdowns in China. After a book excerpt suggested Ms. Yellen favored a stimulus package smaller than the $1.9 trillion that Congress approved last year, the Treasury released a statement denying that she had urged more spending restraint.
At this tenuous moment in her tenure, Ms. Yellen faced tough questions on inflation when she testified before the Senate Finance Committee on Tuesday and is likely to confront similar queries on Wednesday, when she appears before House lawmakers. The hearings are ostensibly about the president’s budget request for the 2023 fiscal year, but Republicans are blaming Mr. Biden’s policies, including the $1.9 trillion stimulus package, for high prices for consumer products. Ms. Yellen’s comments have given them grist to cast his first term as a failure.
“How can Americans trust the Biden administration when the same people that were so wrong are still in charge?” said Tommy Pigott, rapid response director for the Republican National Committee.
The glare is particularly uncomfortable for Ms. Yellen, an economist and former chair of the Federal Reserve, who prides herself on giving straight answers and staying above the political fray.
Ms. Yellen said at the hearing on Tuesday that current levels of inflation were “unacceptable. She pointed to “disruptions caused by the pandemic’s effect on supply chains, and the effects of supply side disturbances to oil and food markets resulting from Russia’s war in Ukraine” as the primary reasons for high prices. She said Mr. Biden’s proposed clean energy initiatives and plans to reform the prescription drug market are measures that could lower costs for Americans.
In recent weeks, Ms. Yellen has had to defend the Biden administration’s economic policies even as fault lines have emerged within the economic team. She has expressed reservations about the lack of progress in rolling back some of the Trump administration’s China tariffs, which she views as taxes on consumers that were “not strategic,” and she has been reluctant to support student debt forgiveness proposals, which could further fuel inflation if people have more money to spend.
Over the weekend, Ms. Yellen came under fire again after an excerpt from a forthcoming biography of her indicated that she had sought unsuccessfully to pare down the pandemic aid bill because of inflation concerns. The Treasury Department released a rare Saturday statement from Ms. Yellen denying that she argued that the package was too big.
“I never urged adoption of a smaller American Rescue Plan package,” she said, insisting that the funds have helped the United States economy weather the pandemic and the fallout from Russia’s war in Ukraine.
Pressed by Senator Steve Daines, a Republican from Montana, about the extent to which the stimulus money fueled inflation, Ms. Yellen argued that countries around the world are all grappling with rising prices and yet they pursued different fiscal policies.
“It can’t be the case that the bulk of the inflation that we’re experiencing reflects the impact of the ARP,” Ms. Yellen said.
Ms. Yellen also pushed back against the idea that an expanded child tax credit that was included in the stimulus package had a significant impact on inflation. She acknowledged that it increased demand and might have led to a “marginal” increase in food prices, but said that was justified by the fact that more children had access to food.
“It cut childhood poverty dramatically,” Ms. Yellen said.
Ms. Yellen did appear to veer away from the view of some Democrats that corporate greed and profiteering was a primary reason for rising prices.
Asked by Senator Charles E. Grassley, an Iowa Republican, about whether greed was to blame, Ms. Yellen demurred.
“I guess I see the bulk of inflation as reflecting supply and demand factors,” Ms. Yellen said, sidestepping the issue of greed.
Throughout the last year, Ms. Yellen has largely been an ardent public defender of the Biden administration’s economic agenda. She has clashed publicly at times with critics such as Lawrence H. Summers, a former Treasury secretary, who warned that too much stimulus could overheat the economy.
For months, Ms. Yellen — and many other economists — talked about inflation as “transitory,” saying rising prices were the result of supply chain problems that would dissipate, and “base effects,” which were making the monthly numbers look worse in comparison with prices that were depressed during the early days of the pandemic.
By May of last year, Ms. Yellen appeared to acknowledge that the Biden administration’s spending proposals had the potential to overheat the economy. She noted at The Atlantic’s Future Economy Summit that the policies could spur growth and that the Fed might have to step in with “modest” interest rate increases if the economy revved up too much.
“It may be that interest rates will have to rise somewhat to make sure that our economy doesn’t overheat, even though the additional spending is relatively small relative to the size of the economy,” Ms. Yellen said.
But economic indicators still suggested that inflation remained under control through much of that spring. In an interview with The New York Times last June, Ms. Yellen said she believed that inflation expectations were in line with the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent target and that while wages were increasing, she did not see a “wage price spiral” on the horizon that could cause inflation to become entrenched.
“We don’t want a situation of prolonged excess demand in the economy that leads to wage and price pressures that build and become endemic,” she said, adding that she did not see that happening.
In the ensuing months, as prices kept rising, Ms. Yellen acknowledged that supply chain problems for items such as microchips — which are crucial for a variety of products, including cars — were worse than she had originally realized. She began to project that inflation could last well into this year.
“I am ready to retire the word transitory,” Ms. Yellen said at a December event sponsored by Reuters, noting that new virus variants had muddled the economic outlook. “I can agree that that hasn’t been an apt description of what we are dealing with.”
Jerome H. Powell, the Fed chair, had just days earlier signaled that the Fed would stop using that word to describe inflation, showing that Ms. Yellen was not out of line with other key economic policymakers.
Ms. Yellen reiterated on Tuesday that she and Mr. Powell “probably could have used a better word than transitory.”
Although some Republicans have called for Ms. Yellen’s resignation, Democrats outside and inside the Biden administration have in the last week come to her defense.
Mr. Summers said on CNN last week that Ms. Yellen had been echoing the views of most mainstream economists last year when she played down inflation and that those incorrect projections called for a rethinking of economic models.
“The consensus didn’t see the overheating risk,” Mr. Summers said. “I’ve been wrong plenty of times in my life, but I did see that there was very substantial demand pressure that was building and it seemed plausible given that that there would be bottlenecks.”
Brian Deese, the director of the White House National Economic Council, dismissed the suggestion that Ms. Yellen could be sidelined as the administration looks to shift how it communicates about the economy.
“Secretary Yellen is our chief spokesperson on the economy,” Mr. Deese told Fox News last week. “That will continue to be the case, as has been the case.”
On Tuesday, Ms. Yellen made the case that the United States economy was facing a potentially deep downturn when Mr. Biden took office and that a robust rescue package made sense at the time. Those funds, she argued, ensured that the economy remained strong.
“We have a the fastest recovery of any developed country,” Ms. Yellen said. “There’s no question that inflation is too hight and it has to be addressed, and we’re starting to do that from a position of strength.”
Oil prices have recently flirted with the highs reached shortly after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, with West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. benchmark crude, starting the week at around $120 per barrel, before falling back slightly. Still, the price of a barrel has risen about 8 percent over the past month, and more than 50 percent since the start of the year.
The national average price for a gallon of regular gasoline was $4.92 on Tuesday, setting another record, according to AAA. That’s about 30 cents higher than a week earlier and $1.87 above a year ago.
In hopes of reducing gas prices and securing oil supplies, President Biden is set to meet Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman in Saudi Arabia, The New York Times’s Clifford Krauss writes. When Mr. Biden does, he will be following in the footsteps of presidents like Jimmy Carter, who flew to Tehran in 1977 to exchange toasts with the shah of Iran on New Year’s Eve. Like the prince, the shah was an unelected monarch with a tarnished human rights record.
As Mr. Carter and other presidents learned, Mr. Biden has precious few tools to bring down costs at the pump. But “a president has to try,” said Bill Richardson, an energy secretary in the Clinton administration. “Unfortunately, there are only bad options. And any alternative options are probably worse than asking the Saudis to increase production.”
The European Union on Tuesday reached an agreement that will require all new smartphones, tablets and laptops to use a common charger by 2026.
The policy is an attempt to address the well-known consumer frustration of having a drawer full of chargers — some for Apple devices, others for portable speakers or hand-held gaming systems. It represented an unusual level of involvement by a government regulator in product design decisions.
Policymakers said the move would cut down on electronic waste. But the new law had been opposed by companies including Apple, which said that it would prevent new charging technologies from developing. Under the law, a European standards body would be in charge of considering future charger designs for all devices.
By 2024, all new mobile phones, tablets, digital cameras, hand-held video game devices, headphones, portable speakers, keyboards, mice, earbuds and other portable devices will need USB-C charging ports, the European Commission announced. By 2026, the law will apply to laptops.
Companies will also be required to sell devices without a charger to reduce the number of chargers in circulation. The European Commission, the executive body of the 27-nation bloc, said that discarded and unused chargers produced 11,000 tons of waste each year.
“A common charger is common sense for the many electronic devices on our daily lives,” Thierry Breton, the European commissioner who helped negotiate the deal, said in a statement.
Although a hot job market pushed up pay for low-wage workers, the average pay gap between those workers and the chief executives of their companies widened even more last year.
The median pay for workers at companies that tend to pay low wages last year was up 17 percent, to $24,000, a jump more than double the rate of inflation, according to a study out Tuesday from the Institute for Policy Studies, a left-leaning think tank. The report examined pay at companies including Lowe’s, Target, Best Buy and Amazon.
Still, those rising wages did not outpace those corporations’ chief executive pay gains, which rose 31 percent, to an average of $10.6 million.
“We do have to acknowledge there was some good news last year,” Sarah Anderson, the lead author of the “Executive Excess” study, told the DealBook newsletter. “But this could have been a time when companies used rising profits to level the pay playing field. Instead, we haven’t seen a very big shift in pay equity.”
The study underscores the tight labor market and inflationary pressure that companies have been facing over the past year. That pressure has benefited lower-wage workers for the first time in years. The institute’s study last year, which looked at a different set of companies, found that median pay for all workers fell 2 percent in 2020. This year’s study looked at the lowest-paying 300 firms in the Russell 3000, an index of publicly traded stocks that includes megafirms as well as midsize and smaller public companies, and found that at nearly 60 percent of them, pay rose faster last year for chief executives than for the average worker.
Chief executives did even better at companies where salaries did not keep pace with inflation. Median workers’ wages at about a third of the firms in the study did not keep pace with inflation. At those companies, the average chief executive pay was up 65 percent, or more than double the increase at all of the firms in the study.
Among the companies highlighted in the report was Best Buy, where median pay fell 2 percent last year to $29,999, while the company’s chief executive, Corie Barry, received a 30 percent pay increase, to $15.6 million. Best Buy said in a financial filing that its executive compensation was “focused on pay for performance” and that the company’s management had delivered “strong results in its most recent fiscal year.”
Wells Fargo is temporarily suspending a hiring policy that led some managers to conduct sham interviews of nonwhite and female candidates, following a report by The New York Times highlighting the practice, the bank’s chief executive, Charles W. Scharf, told employees in a letter on Monday.
Instituted in 2020, the bank’s “diverse slate” policy stipulated that at least half the candidates interviewed for open positions paying $100,000 or more in annual salary needed to be “diverse” — a catchall term for racial minorities, women and members of other disadvantaged groups.
Though a version of the policy had been in place for years, Wells Fargo’s leaders spelled it out in writing in mid-2020 as part of a broader push to increase diversity at the bank. On Monday, Mr. Scharf told employees that the policy would be put on hold for several weeks to give the bank’s leaders time to study its use and make changes.
The pause would allow the bank to gain confidence that “the guidelines live up to their promise,” and that “hiring managers, senior leaders and recruiters fully understand how the guidelines should work,” Mr. Scharf said in the letter.
The Times reported on May 19 that a former employee in the bank’s wealth management business had complained that he was being forced by his bosses to interview people for jobs that had already been promised to others, just to meet the “diverse slate” requirement.
The man, Joe Bruno, was one of a dozen current and former Wells Fargo employees who said they had witnessed or participated in fake interviews. Some of the employees said that sham interviews were also conducted for jobs that paid less than $100,000. The purpose was to record the fact that “diverse” candidates had been interviewed in case bank regulators checked whether Wells Fargo was giving minorities a fair shot at getting jobs, they said.
After The Times report was published, lawmakers, including Senator Sherrod Brown, Democrat of Ohio who heads the Senate Banking Committee, criticized the practice. Mr. Brown wrote to Mr. Scharf demanding that the bank fix its problems “once and for all.” Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, also a Democrat, cited the report in a May 20 tweet in which she called for the breakup of Wells Fargo.
Over and over, @Wellsfargo gets caught cheating. And this time they've been caught giving fake job interviews to candidates to "boost diversity efforts on paper" —even though they had already given the job to someone else. This bank needs to be broken up.https://t.co/kX6bbgvSw2— Elizabeth Warren (@SenWarren) May 20, 2022
Mr. Bruno was fired last August after he complained to his bosses. Bank officials said in messages to employees following the Times report that if fake interviews had happened at all, they represented isolated incidents that were not in keeping with the bank’s policy.
In his letter, Mr. Scharf said the bank had reasons to believe the “diverse slate” policy was working. In 2021, for example, 42 percent of people hired for jobs paying $100,000 or more were members of a racial or ethnic minority, an increase of five percentage points from two years earlier, before the “diverse slate” policy was in place.
But Mr. Scharf said in Monday’s letter that the members of the bank’s operating committee — which includes its most senior executives — had concluded that there was “opportunity to improve our implementation around some of our activities.”
Mr. Scharf said that the “diverse slate” policy would be suspended for several weeks to give leaders a chance to “review our guidelines and processes and to make improvements.” Once the review is completed, he added, Wells Fargo will “make adjustments to our diverse slate program where appropriate and relaunch it during the month of July.”
Today in the On Tech newsletter, Shira Ovide writes that Apple, Meta, Microsoft and Snap are steering toward a future in which we’ll wear computers on our heads for interactions that fuse physical and digital life.
But given technologists’ spotty record of predicting digital revolutions, it’s worth examining why their pronouncements haven’t come true yet — and if this time, they’re right."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "At the peak of the holiday season, retail added 41,000 jobs despite continued waves of store closures. Just in the past week, Pier 1 Imports said it would close up to 450 stores after a 13 percent drop in quarterly sales, and Macy’s said it would close 29 stores within weeks.
Average hourly earnings rose by a mere 0.1 percent in December, meaning over the past year, wage growth is at 2.9 percent.
Economists say wages are not growing as fast as they should be, especially for those who aren’t seeing a boost from state and local minimum wage increases. Many businesses are still pulling back on investment and say Trump’s truce with China does little to assuage their anxiety. Plus, Democratic leaders and presidential hopefuls caution that Trump’s economic and trade agenda could eventually stymie the growth.
Diane Swonk, chief economist for the accounting firm Grant Thornton, said the disappointing wage growth reflects “an economy where you can get a job, but it’s harder to get a raise.” Swonk said it’s possible wage growth figures for the start of 2020 could be ever harsher because wages for 2019 peaked in February.
Analysts were also concerned about transportation and warehousing, with transportation in particular affected by the economy’s manufacturing slowdown. But those numbers didn’t change all that much.
Average monthly jobs gains for all of last year were 176,000, compared to 223,000 in 2018. But Mark Hamrick, senior economic analyst for Bankrate, said the decrease shouldn’t come as a surprise and that December’s figures didn’t reveal “anything that rocked our world.”
“Expansions don’t last forever, and this one probably is getting a little long toothed, but it’s not on life support,” Hamrick said.
Analysts predicted around 150,000 new jobs for the month and forecast a steady unemployment rate of 3.5 percent. Those estimates were significantly less than the 256,000 jobs added in November, although those figures also accounted for thousands of General Motors workers who returned to the workforce after a lengthy strike.
The jobs figures come as President Trump touts the economy’s strength as one of his administration’s top achievements. In 2019, the unemployment rate in particular hit lows not seen 50 years. The Dow Jones industrial average has gained about 45 percent since Trump took office, and fears of a recession have largely faded. The Federal Reserve cut interest rates three times last year, helping to sustain an 11-year-old economic expansion. And last month, the United States and China reached a “phase one” trade deal that is set to be signed on Jan. 15."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Updated Jan. 30, 2013 11:46 am ET

STOCKHOLM—Hennes & Mauritz HM. B -2.51%decrease; red down pointing triangle AB, spending heavily to keep pace with its biggest rival, reported lower earnings as the cost of growth initiatives coupled with sluggish sales growth weighed on the Swedish retailer's bottom line.

H&M, the world's second biggest clothing retailer by sales behind Zara-owner Inditex SA, said Wednesday it will press forward with expansion plans that are expected to cost at least 7 billion Swedish kronor ($1.09 billion) in 2013. Those plans include launching its & Other Stories fashion chain, boosting e-commerce efforts and opening nearly one new store per day, including outlets in new emerging markets.

The plan, however, could put near-term pressure on H&M Chief Executive Karl-Johan Persson as he balances the need to grow with the task of navigating tough economic and competitive conditions. On Wednesday, Mr. Persson said in an interview that the fourth-quarter sales performance was "marginally below" his expectations as European customers have less cash in their pockets, but he is satisfied with H&M's 2012 results.

Total sales growth slowed during each consecutive quarter in 2012 and H&M expects the malaise to carry over into January due to cold weather. The company expects total January growth of about 5%.

Total fourth-quarter sales, excluding value-added tax, rose 5% to 32.5 billion kronor from 30.95 billion kronor a year earlier. Sales at stores open for at least a year were unchanged.

"Overall we believe these are disappointing results, as management continues to step up investment in both the product and longer term initiatives, yet sales performance has not rebounded," Bernstein analyst Jamie Merriman said of H&M.

H&M's net profit slipped 1.3% to 5.29 billion kronor ($830 million) in the three months to Nov. 30, from 5.36 billion kronor a year earlier. Analysts had expected a net profit of around 5.09 billion kronor, and the better-than-forecast performance was mainly due to a lower-than-anticipated tax rate.

Shares of H&M initially fell on the report but recovered before market close to trade 0.4% higher. In 2012 H&M's stock rose a relatively modest 6%, compared with a 60% increase in the price of Inditex shares. Inditex, based in Spain, has logged strong sales growth online and has a significant exposure to emerging markets.

While not worried about the company's competitive position, Mr. Persson indicated he is prepared to lower prices if need be.

"The competition compared with five years ago has clearly increased," he said. "But we've still delivered a better result and we see that we have strengthened our position against our competitors. If we see that we lose market share, we would have to reposition ourselves."

Increased competition from low-price retailers like U. K-based Primark is also putting pressure on H&M to lower prices.

H&M, based in Stockholm, has also been hit by the strong Swedish krona.

Mr. Persson, 37 years old, took the helm of H&M in the middle of 2009 as the economy was in the grip of a global slowdown. The executive has been focused on increasing the company's global presence, spending 17 billion kronor ($2.7 billion) on new investments during the 2010 through 2012 time frame.

Last year, H&M added 304 stores globally, or 29 more than its original plan, bringing the store count to 2,800. In 2013, the company could boost spending by as much as 10% to add another 325 stores, including outlets in five countries it currently isn't present in: Chile, Estonia, Lithuania, Serbia and Indonesia.

The pace of store openings is still behind archrival Inditex, which is on track to open between 450 and 520 new stores in its fiscal 2012 ending Jan. 31.

Mr. Persson said that new markets, like Chile—where H&M in March will open its first South American store—will boost the top line. Mr. Persson said he is looking at Brazil, Argentina and Colombia as possible new markets for 2014.

He also has an eye on India if authorities there allow a fully owned operation, much like the arrangement Swedish peer IKEA has been setting up.

"India is such an interesting country that we want to go in and own 100% and that is not possible today," Mr. Persson said, adding that H&M is ready to meet the 30% sourcing requirements from local suppliers if authorities grant full ownership rights.

While Mr. Persson said he is optimistic about increasing sales at comparable stores this year, he is also betting on a big part of future sales growth to come from new stores, including H&M's higher-end brand Collection of Style, or COS, and its new fashion chain, called & Other Stories.

He hopes that growth from new markets will help offset stagnating retail sales in Europe. Data from industry magazine TextilWirtschaft show that the overall clothing market in Germany, H&M's single biggest market, contracted for the third month in a row in January.

Write to Anna Molin at anna.molin@dowjones.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
frame of article is: business
###
article: "Here’s what you need to know:
Macy’s plans to reopen all of its stores within six weeks.
Macy’s plans to reopen 68 of its stores on Monday in states with looser restrictions for non-essential businesses, and another 50 on May 11, the company said in an email on Thursday.
The beleaguered company, which also owns Bloomingdales and Bluemercury, expects that all 775 of its locations will be reopened in six weeks based on state and local guidelines and if infection rates decline as projected, Macy’s chief executive, Jeff Gennette, said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal.
The company made the announcement the same week that documents from Simon Property Group, the country’s biggest mall operator, outlined plans to reopen 49 shopping centers between Friday and Monday. Macy’s said that roughly one-fourth of the stores it plans to reopen on Monday are in Simon malls.
In an online presentation, Macy’s said that its stores must meet certain requirements to reopen. The stores must be “financially attractive” and have “minimum viable staffing.” They must also meet certain health and safety standards, including staff training on new health and safety routines, as well as enough sanitation supplies and sneeze guards installed.
Europe will pay banks to lend money amid a deep downturn.
To counter a deep economic decline, the European Central Bank said Thursday it will effectively pay banks to lend money as it vowed to do whatever is necessary to counteract the economic impact of the coronavirus.
Under certain conditions the central bank will allow commercial banks in the eurozone to borrow at a rate of minus 1 percent provided the money is passed on to businesses and consumers. The negative interest rate means that banks do not need to pay back all of the money that they borrow.
Christine Lagarde, the president of the E.C.B., said at a news conference Thursday that the eurozone economy could decline by as much as 12 percent this year. The downturn is “unprecedented in peacetime,” she said.
In a statement Thursday, the central bank also said that it was prepared to further increase its purchases of government and corporate bonds, a form of money printing intended to keep market interest rates low and make it easier for businesses and consumers to get credit.
The central bank had previously earmarked more than 1 trillion euros, or $1.1 trillion, for asset purchases. But the bank said Thursday it is prepared to raise that sum “as much as necessary and for as long as needed.”
Consumer spending plunged in March.
The Commerce Department reported on Thursday that consumer spending in March fell 7.5 percent from February’s level, a stunning decline that helps explain why the overall economy is so weak. Consumer activity is responsible for two-thirds of the country’s economic performance.
The data came a day after the government said U.S. gross domestic product, the broadest measure of goods and services produced in the economy, fell at a 4.8 percent annual rate in the first quarter of the year. That is the first decline since 2014, and the worst quarterly contraction since the country was in a deep recession more than a decade ago.
Even so, most of the quarter came before the coronavirus pandemic forced widespread shutdowns and layoffs. Economists expect figures from the current quarter to show G.D.P. contracting at an annual rate of 30 percent or more.
another 3.8 million file unemployment claims, overwhelming the states.
6
million
30,307,000
5
Claims were filed in
the last six weeks
4
Initial jobless claims, per week
Seasonally adjusted
3
2
RECESSION
1
0
’04
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
6
million
30,307,000
5
Claims were filed in
the last six weeks
4
3
RECESSION
2
Initial jobless claims, per week
Seasonally adjusted
1
0
’04
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
30,307,000
6
million
Claims were filed in
the last six weeks
5
Initial jobless claims, per week
4
Seasonally adjusted
3
RECESSION
2
1
0
’04
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
30,307,000
6
million
Claims were filed in
the last six weeks
5
4
3
RECESSION
2
Initial jobless claims, per week
Seasonally adjusted
1
0
’04
’08
’09
’12
’16
’20
The American economy continues to stagger under the weight of the coronavirus pandemic, with another 3.8 million workers filing for unemployment benefits last week.
The figures announced Thursday by the Labor Department bring the number of workers joining the official jobless ranks in the last six weeks to more than 30 million, and underscore just how dire economic conditions remain.
Many state agencies still find themselves overwhelmed by the flood of claims, leaving perhaps millions with dwindling resources to pay the rent or put food on the table.
If anything, according to many economists, the job losses may be far worse than government figures indicate. A study by the Economic Policy Institute found that roughly 50 percent more people than counted as filing claims in a recent four-week period may have qualified for benefits but were stymied in applying or didn’t even try because they found the process too formidable.
“The problem is even bigger than the data suggest,” said Elise Gould, a senior economist with the institute, a left-leaning research group. “We’re undercounting the economic pain.”
The Fed will expand its program to bolster midsize businesses.
The Federal Reserve on Thursday said it plans to expand its effort to lend directly to midsize businesses, called the Main Street lending program.
The program, which the Fed first announced on March 23, is part of the central bank’s broader push to keep credit flowing into the economy. The Fed has yet to give a start date for the program.
Fed officials had previously provided an outline of how the Main Street program might work, but went back to the drawing board after receiving more than 2,200 comments from banks, businesses and individuals recommending tweaks. Now the Fed will make loans as small as $500,000 — down from a minimum of $1 million previously — and expand eligibility requirements so that bigger companies can qualify.
The revision also creates a new program category that will allow riskier companiesto access the Fed-supported loans.
Mark Zuckerberg is worried about a second outbreak. Elon Musk says lockdowns are “fascist.”
As big companies report their latest quarterly earnings, C.E.O.s are revealing radically different attitudes toward the lockdowns and social-distancing measures imposed during the pandemic. It has made for lively conference calls with analysts, which are normally focused on far more prosaic matters.
After the market closed on Wednesday, Facebook reported better-than-expected earnings for the first quarter, and also “signs of stability” in the second. Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, warned that the effects of the pandemic would be significant and long lasting, with “massive societal costs” stemming from stay-at-home orders. But he said that reopening too quickly “will almost guarantee future outbreaks and worse longer-term health and economic outcomes.”
Around the same time, Tesla announced that it eked out an unexpected first-quarter profit. What made headlines, though, was Elon Musk’s profanity-laced rant about stay-at-home orders. The electric carmaker’s chief, who has clashed with officials in California over the closure of Tesla’s factory there, likened lockdowns to “forcibly imprisoning people in their homes against all their constitutional rights.” Then, in response to a question about infrastructure spending, he really let rip.
“If somebody wants to stay in their house, that’s great. They should be allowed to stay in their house, and they should not be compelled to leave,” he said. “But to say that they cannot leave their house, and they will be arrested if they do, this is fascist. This is not democratic. This is not freedom.”
Here are the companies that have returned small-business loans.
A California citrus grower returned its federal stimulus loan on Thursday, adding to the growing ranks of companies to give back their funds amid public outcry.
Limoneira Company, an agribusiness that grows lemons, citrus, avocado and other produce, said in a securities filing that it would give back the $3.61 million loan it received from City National Bank. The company, which has 319 employees, said last week that it had received the loan. In total, more than 25 public and private companies have disclosed their decision to return the loans.
The flood of returns from firms that have received forgivable Paycheck Protection Loans comes after the federal government said they did not believe that large public companies with access to other capital should take them.
There has also been significant public frustration with a program that has delivered funds to big corporate players while Main Street businesses struggle to apply for the loans. The program reopened this week with $320 billion in new funding.
Companies that returned loans:
American Airlines reports a $2.2 billion loss.
American Airlines reported a loss of $2.2 billion in the first quarter of the year, a damaging but expected blow in an industry rocked by the pandemic. The company ended the quarter with $6.8 billion in cash on hand and plans to increase that to $11 billion by the end of June, a recognition that the downturn will be prolonged.
“Never before has our airline, or our industry, faced such a significant challenge,” the company’s chief executive, Doug Parker, said in a statement.
The airline said it expected to cut costs by $12 billion this year, in part by taking advantage of cheaper fuel. It has also slashed its schedule by 80 percent in April and May, and by 70 percent in June. Like its peers, American is accelerating aircraft retirements, freezing nonessential hiring and some pay raises, cutting executive pay, and offering unpaid leave and early retirement.
American has more than $10 billion in assets that it plans to use as collateral to raise additional capital, including an estimated $4.75 billion federal loan under the stimulus passed last year. The carrier also received $5.8 billion in a mix of mostly grants and some loans from the federal government to pay employees through September, more than any other airline.
The eurozone economy suffers its worst slump since bloc was created.
The eurozone economy shrank 3.8 percent during the first three months of the year while unemployment rose, as official data confirmed that the bloc is in the midst of its worst downturn since the common currency was introduced in 1999.
Economic output in France and Spain slumped more than 5 percent during the quarter — declines not seen since the end of World War II, according to official statistics from those countries. Lockdowns did not begin until March, near the end of the period covered by the report, suggesting that data for the quarter that began in April could be even worse.
Unemployment in the eurozone rose to 7.4 percent in March from 7.3 percent in February, interrupting a recovery that had been underway since the low point of the eurozone debt crisis in 2013.
In France, Germany and many other countries, employees are on government subsidized furloughs and do not count as unemployed. The jobless rate is almost certain to rise further as airlines, carmakers and other large corporations lay off workers in reaction to plunging sales.
Inflation in the eurozone fell to 0.4 percent in April from 0.7 percent in March as oil prices plunged. The rate is the lowest since 2016. But prices for food, alcohol and tobacco surged.
Twitter’s usage surges in an unprofitable quarter.
Twitter said on Thursday that it had an unprofitable quarter for the first time in more than two years, even as more users rushed to the platform. The company lost $8.3 million in the first quarter, breaking a profitability streak that started at the end of 2017.
Advertising revenue dropped substantially from March 11 to March 31, dipping 27 percent, as shelter-in-place orders were issued in the United States and advertisers cut their spending, the company said. Twitter’s revenue was $808 million in the quarter, a 3 percent increase from the prior year and above analyst estimates of $776 million.
Daily active users grew 24 percent from the previous year to 166 million, the highest growth rate Twitter has ever reported.
Stocks dip as jobless claims rack up.
U.S. stocks followed European markets lower on Thursday as investors considered data revealing a sharp contraction in the eurozone economy and another surge of jobless claims in the United States.
The S&P 500 was down about 1 percent in early trading. European markets fell about 2 percent after a rally in Asia.
On Wednesday, the S&P 500 had gained nearly 3 percent, lifted by news that the drugmaker Gilead Science had seen early results that its experimental drug remdesivir could speed recovery in patients infected with the coronavirus. A steady climb has lifted the S&P 500 by more than 31 percent since its March 23 low.
This news was also a boon to Chinese drugmakers that make some of the ingredients in Gilead’s drug.
Broader positive sentiment was on display in commodities markets, too, as the price of oil continued a rally after Norway, a major oil producer, said that it would limit production, something that will lift sagging prices. The price of the U.S. benchmark, West Texas Intermediate, jumped 16 percent to $17.53, while Brent crude, the international benchmark, rose more than 12 percent to $25.31 a barrel.
Catch up: Here’s what else is happening.
Comcast, the nation’s largest cable operator, saw it’s biggest jump in broadband subscribers and now has nearly 27 million internet customers, according to its first-quarter earnings report. But it also saw one of its biggest declines in video, with more than 388,000 people cutting their TV subscriptions. Advertising, which includes its NBCUniversal division, dropped more than 2 percent, and its theme parks business plummeted 27 percent.
Kraft Heinz, which has struggled in recent years as consumers steered clear of its packaged foods, reported on Thursday that first-quarter sales surged 3.3 percent to $6.2 billion as shoppers stocked up on Kraft Macaroni & Cheese, Heinz ketchup, and Planters nuts. Net income for the food giant fell 6.7 percent to $378 million.
The maker of Lysol, Reckitt Benckiser, reported a surge in sales for the first quarter of 2020 as the coronavirus pandemic led consumers to snap up its disinfectant products. Revenue was up 13 percent over the period a year earlier, the Britain-based business said. The company also said it saw strong demand for its Mucinex and Norofen cold and pain relief medicines.
Tapestry, the company that owns the brands Coach and Kate Spade, said it would open about 40 of its stores in North America on Friday for “contactless curbside or storefront pickup.”
Dunkin’ Brands, one of the world’s largest fast food restaurant companies, reported that sales plunged 19 percent at Dunkin’ Donuts and 23 percent at Baskin-Robbins in the last three weeks of March. The company has 21,000 franchised locations in 60 countries.
Royal Dutch Shell, Europe’s largest oil company, said on Thursday that it would cut its dividend for the first time since World War II as the company reported a loss of $24 million for the quarter compared to $6 billion in profits in the period a year earlier. The company said it was reducing its dividend.
Reporting was contributed by Jack Ewing, Stanley Reed, Kate Conger, Ben Dooley, Nelson D. Schwartz, Alexandra Stevenson, Sapna Maheshwari, David McCabe, Edmund Lee, Mohammed Hadi, Matt Phillips, Jason Karaian, Niraj Chokshi, Neal E. Boudette, Steve Lohr and Mike Isaac."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "The fact that this even needs to be said demonstrates that there's been a breakdown in the democratic process, but we'll say it anyway: Our number-one priority should be protecting the planet for future generations. That said, green energy makes sense even if we base our thinking on economic considerations alone.

Energy policies can roughly be divided into two kinds: those which benefit society as a whole, and those which only benefit the very few -- the Koch brothers and their ilk.

Guess which kind the GOP supports? Republicans are blocking pro-growth, job-creating green energy investments while pushing a pipeline that would enrich the few at the expense of the many -- with potentially disastrous environmental consequences.

If you want to know why, follow the money.

The '99-Percent Plan'

A new report from the Political Economy Research Institute and the Center for American Progress (the "PERI-CAP" report) offers a plan to bring the United States in line with an international emissions-reduction goal: 40-percent reduction of carbon dioxide emissions from 2005 levels by 2035.

You might call it the "99-percent plan," since its economic benefits would accrue to all income levels, and throughout the economy as a whole. The report, by Robert Pollin, Heidi Garrett-Peltier, James Heintz, and Bracken Hendricks, makes the following key points:

* The plan would require annual public and private investment of approximately200 billion per year.,

* The government share of that expenditure would average55 billion per year, which is within the range of clean energy investments already made in recent years., 

Total investment would be less than half that being spent by the oil and gas industry.

Some $90 billion of those annual investments would go toward raising the efficiency standards of buildings, transportation systems, and industrial equipment -- investments which would result in lower operating costs, as well as a 30-percent reduction in energy consumption from current levels. As the report explains, most of these investments will be paid off after an average of three years. After that there would be net financial gains.

The remaining $110 billion per year would go toward renewable energy sources with low or zero emissions, increasing U.S. energy production -- and independence.

The report projects a net gain of 2.7 million jobs, at all income levels, for a decrease of 1.5 percent in the unemployment rate.

The Cost of Doing Nothing

Republicans are openly hostile to investments of this kind. If they succeed in blocking plans like this one from taking effect, we'll never see those 2.7 million jobs -- or the increases in middle-class income which would accompany a stronger labor market. We'll lose the net savings in energy costs (after making back the initial investment on an average three-year time frame) and the money that would free up for other kinds of spending.

If a plan like this isn't implemented as part of a global initiative -- one it could help set in motion -- we'll spend an estimated $1.5 trillion more every 10 years as the result of unchecked climate change. (That figure is based on a report from the White House Council of Economic Advisors, which estimated that a planetary temperature increase of 3 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels would result in $150 billion in economic damages every year -- in perpetuity.)

In short, even if we set aside our concerns for the future of the planet, the Republicans' do-nothing approach to green energy policy will cost our nation a great deal of money.

But wait: it gets worse.

The '1-Percent Plan'

When it comes to energy, Republicans aren't just sitting on their hands. They're also talking out of both sides of their mouths. They dismiss proposals like the PERI-CAP plan, which would create millions of jobs while promoting American independence. At the same time, they've been aggressively pushing the Keystone XL pipeline -- because, they claim, it will create jobs and improve America's energy independence.

It's a smokescreen. The number of jobs created by Keystone XL has been estimated at a mere 2,500 to 4,500 -- and those jobs are only temporary. (The pipeline's defenders keep throwing out a figure of 42,000 jobs, but that's been roundly debunked.) The number of permanent jobs created by the pipeline has been estimated at... 35.

Energy independence? The pipeline would ship dirty, sludge-like material from Canada to Texas, where it would be processed and refined -- most of it destined for sale to other nations, where it will do nothing to reduce prices at American gas pumps.

But, while the Keystone XL pipeline wouldn't create widespread prosperity, it would certainly do a lot to further enrich a very few people -- people who are already extraordinarily wealthy. The holders of Canadian mineral rights would make out extremely well, for example.

And who are some of those top leaseholders? Enter... the Koch brothers. Contrary to right-wing denials, the Kochs have invested massively in Canadian tar sands. They may, in fact, be the largest leaseholders of Canadian tar sands of all. (They have obscured the exact figures through the use of intermediaries when buying up leases.)

Subsidized Destruction

Some reports have placed the Kochs' potential payday as high as $100 billion should the pipeline be built. While the exact figure isn't known, it's safe to say they'll make a great deal of money.

The rest of us aren't likely to fare so well. Although its supporters like to claim that the pipeline won't cost a dollar of public money, its funders would receive significant tax subsidies from Uncle Sam. Those subsidies would range from $1 billion to $1.8 billion, much of destined for an oil industry which already receives an estimated $4 billion per year in undeserved tax breaks.

The pipeline would cost us in other ways, too, including the cost of future oil spills. An independent review of the potential for catastrophic spills, conducted at the University of Nebraska, reads like a series of disaster-film storylines. Based on past experience, the review forecasts 91 spills over the 50-year lifetime of the pipeline. (The Keystone 1 pipeline experienced 12 spills in its first year alone.)

How disastrous might such a spill become? The proposed pipeline would cross 1,904 waterways, including the Ogallala Aquifer, which is the largest source of fresh water in the United States.

An observer described a spill from Keystone 1 this way: "It was just like the movies you used to see as a kid, when they'd strike oil and the geyser of oil shooting straight up in the air, with the plume on top."

Then there's the cost of climate change itself. The Keystone XL pipeline would increase carbon emissions so much that one study estimated it would be the equivalent of Americans driving an additional 60 billion miles every year.

But then, what do the Koch brothers care about carbon emissions? One Koch subsidiary alone is already responsible for 5 percent of the entire carbon footprint of the United States.

Money Talks

The Republican energy agenda is bad for most people, but it's very good for the Koch brothers and their associates. Coincidence? Hardly. As has been widely reported, the Kochs and their allies plan to spend nearly a billion dollars to influence the 2016 election. (The actual figure reported was $899 million, which has a discount-store, rounded down sort of quality to it: At least it's not $900 million!)

As ThinkProgress reports, this spending (by an estimated 300 people) "is $250 million more than the Republican National Committee, the National Republican Congressional Committee and the National Republican Senatorial Committee spent in 2012 combined." It rivals the amounts spent by the parties themselves and is more than the combined spending of the Kerry and Bush campaigns in 2004.

Republicans tried to ram this Koch-friendly, pro-pipeline agenda through the Senate before breaking last week. According to Senate Democrats, they eventually shut down debate -- in part so that they could head to Palm Springs for a weekend retreat headed by... the Koch brothers.

Of course, the Republicans might be acting out of sincerely held beliefs -- beliefs which just happen to contradict both environmental science and economic common sense. But somehow we don't think so.

99 to 1

All of this offers some important lessons. One is that green energy is redistributive, while fossil-fuel investments like the Keystone XL pipeline tend to reinforce inequality.

Another is that the deferred costs of bad energy policy -- whether they're based on a more unstable climate or future disasters -- can be hard for people to grasp. The pro-environment/pro-growth movement needs to do a better job of communicating these costs -- along with the benefits of good energy policy.

We're also learning that it's getting harder to defend our economic and environmental interests against the corrupting influence of campaign cash. The struggle for a fairer economy is inseparable from the struggle to protect the planet -- and both will be more successful once we've removed big money from our political process.

Until then, we'll have to keep fighting the Koch brothers' bought-and-paid-for Republican servants -- to protect our environment and our economy from projects like Keystone XL, and to promote smart proposals like the PERI-CAP plan."
frame of article is: government
###
article: "A Field Guide to the Election and Climate Change
A FIELD GUIDE TO
THE ELECTION AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Oct. 14, 2020
The presidential election is just weeks away, and climate change has broken through as a defining issue for Americans this year, even amid a historic pandemic and deep economic uncertainty weighing upon the nation.
Two-thirds of Americans say the government isn’t doing enough to reduce the effects of global warming, according to a June survey from the Pew Research Center, and the two presidential candidates’ approaches couldn’t be further apart. President Trump has often dismissed global warming as a hoax; his rival, Joseph R. Biden Jr., calls climate change an “emergency” that requires rapidly overhauling the nation’s energy system.
Their differences raise profound questions about the government’s role in shaping the United States economy and America’s place on the world stage. Here’s a guide to major climate questions in the election.
INDEX
1. WHAT PRICE IS AMERICA READY TO PAY?
2. Are fossil fuels part of the future?
3. How quickly must things change?
4. Should governments put a thumb on the scale?
5. How can the U.S. adapt to worsening disasters?
6. Who is hurt the most by warming?
7. What about birds, bears and other animals?
WHAT PRICE IS AMERICA READY TO PAY?
This is the most common question asked of any politician who proposes to fight climate change: How much will it cost?
But there is another equally important question: How much will it cost to not fight climate change? It makes no sense to look only at the cost of action and ignore the cost of inaction, climate experts point out.
Rising temperatures, after all, carry their own price, including deadlier heat waves, crop failures, more destructive wildfires and higher sea levels. The federal government’s National Climate Assessment warns that even moderate warming could cost the American economy hundreds of billions of dollars each year by century’s end.
Many economists argue that imposing a price on carbon-dioxide emissions, either directly (by taxing fossil fuels) or indirectly (by promoting cleaner energy), can be worth the cost. Others warn that it’s difficult to put a dollar figure on all the risks involved, but that climate action should be thought of as insurance against future catastrophe.
Mr. Trump has consistently downplayed the dangers of global warming and has focused instead on the immediate costs of climate policies. His administration has rolled back emissions rules on cars and power plants to ease burdens on industry, while developing calculations that suggest climate change won’t harm the economy much (a view the government’s own scientists have rejected).
Mr. Biden, for his part, says the United States needs to zero out greenhouse-gas emissions by 2050 to help avoid the worst consequences of warming and has proposed spending $2 trillion over four years as a starting point. He has focused on the health and economic benefits — cleaner air, the creation of new industries — but has faced pressure to ease the blow for industries reliant on fossil fuels.
ARE FOSSIL FUELS PART OF THE FUTURE?
There is broad scientific consensus on what the world must do to halt global warming: Stop burning fossil fuels like coal, natural gas and oil.
Emissions in the United States have been declining in recent years, largely because utilities have been retiring old coal plants in favor of cleaner and cheaper natural gas, wind and solar. Still, last year the country derived 80 percent of its total energy from fossil fuels, an unsustainable level if the worst consequences of warming are to be avoided.
Mr. Trump has long vowed to protect the fossil fuel industry in the name of preserving jobs and enhancing America’s “energy dominance.” His administration tried hard to try to rescue the coal industry (though that effort has largely failed) and has opened new public lands in places like Alaska for oil and gas development.
In a Trump second term, some clean technologies like renewable energy and electric cars would likely still expand, though mainly because they keep getting cheaper and states like California are promoting them. Mr. Trump’s Environmental Protection Agency is, however, expected to challenge efforts like California’s proposal to phase out sales of gasoline cars by 2035.
Mr. Biden envisions a much faster shift away from fossil fuels, saying that new cars should eventually be required to run on electricity instead of gasoline and that emissions from power plants should be zeroed out by 2035. Mr. Trump has sought to turn this into a campaign issue by claiming Mr. Biden would ban fracking, a controversial technique for extracting oil and natural gas, even though Mr. Biden has said he would not. Mr. Biden has vowed to end new drilling permits on federal lands and waters.
HOW QUICKLY MUST THINGS CHANGE?
As countries have awakened to the hazards of climate change, they have slowly started curbing their greenhouse gas emissions in recent years. Some energy giants, like BP, now expect global demand for oil to plateau in the decades ahead.
But scientists warn that governments aren’t acting nearly fast enough to avoid severe global warming. And every year of delay makes the problem harder to solve.
The clock is ticking. Global temperatures have already risen 1 degree Celsius from preindustrial times. For that increase to stay well below 2 degrees Celsius, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change says that global carbon dioxide emissions need to get down to zero by around mid-century. Blowing past that limit, the panel warned, could bring about a world of worsening food and water shortages, collapsing polar ice sheets, and a mass die-off of coral reefs.
Getting emissions all the way down to zero would entail a staggeringly rapid transformation of the world economy.
In the United States, climate activists have rallied around the Green New Deal, which envisions getting the United States to net zero emissions as quickly as possible in order to give less-wealthy nations more time to make their own transitions. Mr. Biden has called the Green New Deal a “crucial framework” but has distanced himself from its particulars, instead aiming to zero out America’s emissions by 2050.
Doing so would require doubling or tripling the pace at which clean electricity sources like wind or solar get installed, one recent study found, all while slashing pollution from cars, trucks, buildings, industry and agriculture.
Mr. Trump hasn’t committed to any climate targets. One analysis by Wood Mackenzie, an energy research firm, suggested that another four years of delay would “dramatically reduce the possibility” of the nation meeting the 2050 goal for eliminating carbon emissions.
SHOULD GOVERNMENTS PUT A THUMB ON THE SCALE?
Governments routinely steer industries, the economy and society toward various goals. Cigarettes are taxed to deter smoking. Roads get built with public money, which encourages driving.
When it comes to climate change, some economists advocate simply taxing fossil fuels in proportion to the damage they cause to health and to the climate. The idea is that these carbon taxes would be a relatively light-handed government intervention that gives private companies incentive to reduce their emissions.
Mr. Biden has mostly steered away from carbon taxes, reflecting a widening view on the left that they are politically treacherous and work too slowly.
Instead, his campaign has called for new regulations and spending that would accelerate wind, solar, and electric vehicle deployment while investing in nascent technologies like hydrogen (a clean-burning fuel that can be produced from gas or renewables), carbon capture (trapping carbon dioxide from industrial polluters before it escapes into the atmosphere and warms the planet) or advanced nuclear power.
These proposals are far more aggressive and ambitious than anything pursued by the Obama administration — which, at the time, was criticized by Republicans for picking winners and losers.
None of this means that Mr. Trump shies away from picking favorite industries, of course.
His administration has pursued policies to encourage oil, gas and coal production while reducing pollution regulations, helping to give those industries a leg up over cleaner rivals. The administration has also overseen new tax credits and regulatory changes to promote low-emissions technologies like carbon capture or advanced nuclear, though that hasn’t been a central focus.
HOW CAN THE U.S. ADAPT TO WORSENING DISASTERS?
For the most part, the United States reacts to disasters after they strike, rather than spending money ahead of time to reduce risks or even move people out of harm’s way. When floods or hurricanes destroy homes, governments spend billions to rebuild in place.
But that’s an untenable long-term strategy. Climate change threatens to make wildfires, hurricanes, floods and other disasters more destructive, putting ever more people at risk.
During the Trump administration, the government has taken several steps to try to prepare for disasters ahead. The Department of Housing and Urban Development is handing out $16 billion to help states defend against future floods and storms. The Federal Emergency Management Agency has sought and received funding to pay for large-scale relocation away from risky areas. More contentiously, the Army Corps of Engineers has pressed cities to evict homeowners from flood zones in exchange for aid.
But experts say the administration is hobbled by its unwillingness to explicitly recognize the climate threat. In 2017, Mr. Trump rescinded a policy that required agencies to consider sea-level rise when building infrastructure. In 2018, FEMA stripped the words “climate change” from its strategic plan.
Mr. Biden has called for more sweeping adaptation measures, proposing, for instance, that all new federal funding to rebuild roads, bridges or water infrastructure must consider climate change.
But there are huge challenges. Past efforts to limit coastal development or set stricter building codes have often faced serious blowback. And the idea of retreating from areas that can’t be defended, which experts warn will become more important as disasters worsen, is a political minefield.
WHO IS HURT THE MOST BY WARMING?
This has been a year — and an election — where racial and economic inequality has leapt to the forefront of the national conversation.
Climate change is an essential part of that dialogue, because its effects are profoundly unequal. Recently, researchers have shown how Black and Hispanic neighborhoods suffer worse heat today than other parts of town, a legacy of racist housing policies. Hotter days threaten to widen the racial achievement gap in schools. Fossil fuel pollution often poses the greatest health hazard to low-income communities.
Solutions can be unequal, too. Subsidies for rooftop solar panels or electric cars often flow to wealthier households. Programs to help people move from flood-prone areas have historically focused on richer neighborhoods.
Mr. Biden says he would make inequality a core part of his climate plan by, for instance, prioritizing low-income communities for clean energy funding. Mr. Trump has said very little on the subject, although his E.P.A. has highlighted its cleanups of Superfund sites as a form of environmental justice.
WHAT ABOUT BIRDS, BEARS AND OTHER ANIMALS?
Alongside climate change, the world faces a biodiversity crisis.
Last year, a United Nations report warned that as many as one million species could face the risk of extinction in the decades ahead as a result of farming, logging, poaching and overfishing as well as rising temperatures. The report called on countries to dramatically scale up their conservation efforts.
Debates over the purpose of America’s public lands stretches back more than a century. How much should be used for mining, logging, recreation? How much kept wild? The candidates have markedly different visions of how far to tip the scales in either direction.
The Trump administration has relaxed protections for wildlife and endangered species, often arguing that they impede industrial activities or job creation in drilling or logging. And he has opened formerly protected lands in places like Utah to energy and mining exploration. This year, however, President Trump also signed the Great Outdoors Act, a bipartisan bill to put hundreds of millions of dollars into conservation and national park programs, a policy sought by environmentalists.
Mr. Biden would go further: He has endorsed a call by conservationists to protect 30 percent of America’s lands and waters by 2030 as a way of aiding biodiversity and slowing extinction rates. (Today, about 12 percent of land and 26 percent of waters are protected.) Achieving that goal may prove complicated in practice, as it could entail restricting industry and other activities in large parts of the country.
WHERE SHOULD AMERICA STAND ON THE WORLD STAGE?
The United States can’t solve climate change alone. After all, the country is responsible only for about 14 percent of global emissions.
So one of the big questions in the election is how the United States should use its influence to shape policies abroad.
In 2017, President Trump said he would withdraw the United States from the Paris climate deal, an international agreement based on peer pressure: Countries set voluntary targets to reduce their emissions, then urge each other to do more. Mr. Trump argued that the deal would shackle the United States and that other countries were unlikely to do their part.
The United States is set to formally leave the Paris agreement on Nov. 4, one day after the presidential election.
Since Mr. Trump announced America’s withdrawal, some governments have continued taking action. Europe has scaled up its climate policies, and China recently pledged to become carbon-neutral by 2060, though it remains unclear how the country might do so.
The question is whether the world could make even faster progress with the United States engaged.
Mr. Biden argues the answer is “yes.” He has pledged to rejoin the Paris agreement and “use every tool of American foreign policy to push the rest of the world to raise their ambitions.”
There is plenty of debate over how much leverage the United States actually has to persuade other countries to act more forcefully on climate change. But at the core is a fundamental split in how each candidate views the role of the United States on the global stage."
frame of article is: government
###
article: "How long should you plan to live?
No one can really know, of course. But the answer to that question may be the most critical factor in making a successful financial plan for retirement.
Fewer baby boomer retirees — Americans born between 1946 and 1964 — have traditional pensions than their parents generation did, which means they will need to retire on income from Social Security and savings. At the same time, expected longevity for men and women at age 65 has jumped more than 10 percent since 2000, according to the Society of Actuaries. Men who reach age 65 can be expected to live to an average age of 86.6, and women to 88.8.
And those figures are only averages, said Vickie Bajtelsmit, a professor of finance at Colorado State University whose research focuses on retirement and financial planning. Working with Social Security Administration mortality data, Professor Bajtelsmit calculated that a 65-year-old man has a 20 percent chance to live to 90, and the odds jump to 30 percent if he is in better-than-average health.
Meanwhile, she concluded, 31 percent of women who reach age 65 will make it to 90. And for those with better health, the figure is 42 percent.Continue reading the main story
Those odds produce what experts call longevity risk, which is the danger of exhausting resources before the end of life. The risk is significant even for more affluent households, Professor Bajtelsmit said.
“The problem is especially large for widows over age 85,” she said, because income typically falls by roughly one-third after the death of a spouse.
Some expenses also fall with only one person still alive, especially for food and medical care. Yet 14.5 percent of widowed women over age 65 live in poverty, according to Social Security Administration data; the figures are higher for divorced women (17.1 percent) and those who never married (23.2 percent).
Online longevity calculators offer one way to push past the averages. But Steve Vernon, an actuary and research scholar at the Stanford Center on Longevity, cautions that it’s best to stick to calculators that rely only on inputs shown by research to be accurate predictors.
Actuarial professionals have collaborated to create one that he especially likes. The Actuaries Longevity Illustrator considers your age, gender, whether you smoke, and your own assessment of your general health. The resulting numbers show a range of possibilities. “You don’t want a calculator that just tells you that you can expect to live to 93,” Mr. Vernon said, adding: “The reality is you could go sooner or later.”
The most conservative retirement plan assumes that you will live to 100, Mr. Vernon said, but there are trade-offs if you take that approach. “Even though I may want my money to last a long time, I also might want to spend money in the early years of retirement, while I’m healthy enough to enjoy it,” he said. “It’s a very personal choice.”
An aggressive target also can paralyze people, Professor Bajtelsmit said, adding: “If you make the target too hard, a lot of people will throw up their hands and say they can’t do it, and they won’t try at all.”
Despite the uncertainty, experts offer several steps for mitigating longevity risk:
BUDGET YOUR EXPENSES Start with a careful projection of non-discretionary expenses in retirement — food, medical care, utilities and transportation. Next, consider strategies that will allow you to cover these expenses from income sources with guaranteed lifetime payment streams, such as Social Security or a pension.
ASSESS YOUR SOCIAL SECURITY STRATEGY Next, consider ways that you could maximize your Social Security through a delayed benefit claim, said Joe Tomlinson, a financial planner and actuary based in Greenville, Me., who has done extensive research on retirement planning. “I always recommend starting with Social Security,” he said. “It’s like buying annuity, but at a much better price.”
Social Security benefits are calculated using a formula called the primary insurance amount, or P.I.A. Although you can claim benefits as young as 62, by waiting until your full retirement age (currently 66), you’ll receive 100 percent of P.I.A.; every 12 months that you delay beyond that point, until age 70, tacks on an additional 8 percent. And benefits are protected from inflation by the program’s annual cost-of-living adjustment.
How is it an investment, exactly? “Say I claim Social Security at 70 instead of 66,” Mr. Tomlinson explained. “The cost is the amount I give up by claiming later, and the payoff is the difference in annual income when I do claim later on.”
KEEP YOUR DAY JOB Working longer can be an important related strategy. More years of wage income can help meet living expenses as you wait to claim Social Security.
But it also reduces the number of years you will need to spend drawing down your nest egg, and perhaps adds more years of saving. Even part-time work can make a big difference, Mr. Vernon said. “It’s a very effective strategy for people in their early 60s,” he added.
Mr. Tomlinson created a custom projection for The New York Times that illustrates the challenges of managing longevity risk with savings alone (see accompanying chart). A key finding: even retirees with sizable savings face significant risk of exhausting their accounts during their lifetimes. Relying on the so-called Monte Carlo method of risk simulation, which analyzes thousands of possible outcomes, Mr. Tomlinson found that a hypothetical couple who had managed to amass $1 million in 401(k) and I.R.A. accounts, and whose annual expenses for essentials would reach $70,000 , faced a 47 percent chance that their retirement plan would “fail” during their lifetimes, assuming they retired at age 65 and claimed Social Security benefits then.
Failure means a forced, sharp cut in living standards. Those whose plans fall into that unfortunate 47 percent “will, on average, fall short of being able to pay for essentials by $168,000 over their lifetimes,” Mr. Tomlinson said. And that’s without considering any high-cost emergency expenses, like home repairs or uninsured medical costs.
Waiting until age 70 to claim Social Security brings the risk of failure down to 38 percent. And, just as important, the magnitude of the corresponding lifetime shortfall is much smaller: $58,000.
CONSIDER AN ANNUITY Finally, Mr. Tomlinson added an immediate annuity into the mix. Say the couple spends $298,000 on a single-premium immediate annuity when they retire, and it pays them $12,000 annually. Here, the odds of plan failure fall to zero. “They will always have enough to cover essential living expenses, no matter how long they live or how badly their investments perform,” Mr. Tomlinson said.
Annuities come in many flavors, but Mr. Tomlinson and other experts who study longevity risk recommend sticking with the most basic types. A single-premium immediate annuity is a straightforward proposition: You plunk down a lump sum of cash and begin receiving payments immediately. Or, pay a much smaller premium for a deferred-income annuity, which begins payments at a future date.
Many retirement planning experts view income annuities as a sensible component to add to a retirement plan. The Obama administration tried to encourage their use in I.R.A. and 401(k) plans by approving rules in 2015 for a new type of deferred-income annuity, called a qualified longevity annuity contract, which can be held in a retirement account but excludes its value from required minimum distributions. Legislation approved late last year by the Senate Finance Committee would further encourage the availability of annuities in workplace plans, by limiting plan sponsor liability in the event of an insurance carrier failure.
Still, income annuities remain a small part of the overall retirement financial market. Sales of single-premium and deferred-income annuities totaled $11.8 billion in 2015 (the last year for which full-year sales are available), according to Limra, an insurance industry research and consulting group. By contrast, $7.3 trillion was held in I.R.A.s at year-end 2015, and $6.7 trillion in workplace-defined contribution plans, according to the Investment Company Institute.
Studies show that retirees worry they won’t get their “money’s worth” if they die before recouping their investment, and many are uncomfortable giving up control of savings. “Consumers don’t love that there is no liquidity,” said Matt Carey, chief executive of Abaris Financial, a three-year-old online start-up that sells income annuity products. “They can be difficult products to get comfortable with, but make so much sense as a small portion of a well-diversified retirement portfolio,” he added.
Mr. Carey co-founded Abaris to help address those retirees’ objections. The company built a technology platform aimed at making it simpler and less expensive to buy income annuities; it focuses mainly on deferred-income annuities, which require less upfront investment, and specifically target longevity risk.
In return for a smaller investment, lifetime payouts of deferred-income annuities begin only if the buyer lives to a certain age. For example, a $100,000 purchase of a deferred-income annuity by a 65-year-old man, with income starting 10 years later, would generate roughly $14,000 in annual income, according to Abaris.
Mr. Tomlinson is skeptical about deferred-income annuities, arguing that they expose buyers to excessive stock market risk while waiting for the payments to begin. “All you have to do is manage your portfolio well until you reach age 80 or 85,” he said. “But that is easier said than done.”
But retaining liquidity during retirement has its benefits. “There could be an investment shock or a long-term care need or high medical expense — even something as simple as a roof that needs to be replaced,” Professor Bajtelsmit said. “It might not happen until you’re 80 or 85, but someplace along the line, something will happen.”Continue reading the main story"
frame of article is: other
###
article: "Study shows Western European nations atop ranks for retiree quality of life; income inequality is big problem in America

Updated July 19, 2016 9:03 am ET

The outlook for retirement security in the U.S. is improving, but the country still trails many Western European nations on measures of importance to retirees, including health-care costs and access to saving via workplace retirement plans.

That’s the conclusion of a new study by Natixis Global Asset Management, a Paris- and Boston-based company with $884.9 billion under management.

In this year’s study, the U.S. ranks 14th out of the 43 developed or rapidly developing countries Natixis ranked, up one notch from 15th in last year’s results, which were revised due to a change in the study’s methodology.

The Natixis Global Retirement Index gauges how well retirees live in 43 nations based on 18 measures of health, wealth, quality of life and “material well-being” that affect citizens’ retirement security. The measures include per capita income, health-care costs and longevity figures published by organizations including the World Bank, the World Health Organization and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

The goal of the report is not simply to rank the countries but also to better understand “where the best ideas are coming from” on how to solve some of the retirement challenges developed countries face, including rising longevity, falling birth rates and low interest rates, which make it harder for retirees to earn income on their investments.

This is the fourth annual ranking. This year’s survey focused on 43 countries, down from 150 in the past. The reason for reducing the number was to focus on countries that face similar challenges when it comes to fostering retirement security, according to Dave Goodsell, executive director of the durable portfolio construction research center at Natixis, which publishes the study.

As in the past, Western and Northern European nations with strong social safety nets dominate the top 10. The top five are Norway, Switzerland, Iceland, New Zealand and Sweden—countries that also ranked in the top five last year.

Several of the top-ranked countries, including No. 1 Norway and No. 2 Switzerland, have some form of mandatory workplace retirement savings.

The best performers generally “tend to provide more systems, not just government programs,” that require individuals to save for retirement, says Mr. Goodsell.

While the U.S. is highly ranked on per capita income and has low levels of unemployment and inflation and a strong economy—all boons for retirees—it lags behind other nations when it comes to access to health care and life expectancy and other measures of material well-being that affect retirees, such as income inequality.

Income inequality puts “the goal of retirement savings beyond the reach of millions,” Natixis says.

Another negative for the U.S. is a lack of access to employer-sponsored retirement savings plans for one-third of workers, says Mr. Goodsell. Even among those with access to these plans, some 40% save less than 5% of their salaries per year, according to Natixis.

This year’s top 15 countries are:

1) Norway

2) Switzerland

3) Iceland

4) New Zealand

5) Sweden

6) Australia

7) Germany

8) Netherlands

9) Austria

10) Canada

11) Finland

12) Denmark

13) Luxembourg

14) U.S.

15) Belgium

No. 1-ranked Norway has a “very sound policy around retirement savings,” Mr. Goodsell says. “It has a strong economy, solid funding for government retirement plans through their sovereign wealth fund, and a focus on providing access to retirement savings plans.”

At the other end of the spectrum, India finished last among the 43 countries, with Greece, Brazil, the Russian Federation, Turkey and China also among the bottom 10.

Among the factors that beset the bottom 10: weak economies and low income, as well as high inflation and high unemployment.

Write to Anne Tergesen at anne.tergesen@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
frame of article is: other
###
article: "June 22, 2018 10:00 am ET

Americans are reaching retirement age in worse financial shape than the prior generation, for the first time since Harry Truman was president.

This cohort should be on the cusp of their golden years. Instead, their median incomes including Social Security and retirement-fund receipts haven’t risen in years, after having increased steadily from the 1950s.

They have high average debt, are often paying off children’s educations and are dipping into savings to care for aging parents. Their paltry 401(k) retirement funds will bring in a median income of under $8,000 a year for a household of two.

In total, more than 40% of households headed by people aged 55 through 70 lack sufficient resources to maintain their living standard in retirement, a Wall Street Journal analysis concluded. That is around 15 million American households. (Be the first to read the latest installments in our coverage of the coming retirement crisis. Subscribe by email.)

Things are likely to get worse for a broader swath of America. New census data released this week shows the surge of aging boomers is leaving the country with fewer young workers to support the elderly.

Individuals will find themselves staying on the job past 70 or taking menial jobs as senior citizens. They’ll have to rely more on children for funding, pressuring younger generations, too.

Companies, while benefiting from older workers’ experience, also have to grapple with employees who delay retirement, which means they’ll be footing the costs of a less healthy workforce and retraining older workers.

And for the nation, the retirement shortfall portends a drain on public resources, especially if seniors reduce taxable spending and officials decide to cover additional public-assistance costs for older Americans who can’t make ends meet.

“This generation was left on their own,” said Alicia Munnell, director of the Boston College Center for Retirement Research. The Journal’s conclusion about living standards in retirement was based on estimates provided by Ms. Munnell’s center and data from the U.S. Census.

As with many baby boomers, 56-year-old Kreg Wittmayer once thought he was doing things right for a solid retirement. In his 20s, he began saving in his 401(k). He cashed it out after a divorce at age 34. He built up the fund again, then cashed out five years later after losing his job, he says. “It was just too easy to get at.”

Mr. Wittmayer, of Des Moines, Iowa, says he now has a little over $100,000 saved for retirement. He owes $92,000 in parent loans for his daughters’ college costs, he says. He doesn’t know when, or whether, he will be able to retire, in direct contrast to his parents, a former firefighter and a former teacher who collect guaranteed pensions. “They never had to worry about saving for their retirement.”

This prospect is upending decades of progress in financial security among the aging. In the postwar era, for a while, fixed government and company pensions gave millions a guaranteed income on top of Social Security. An improving economy led to increased wages. Many Americans retired in better shape than their parents.

No more. Baby boomers were the first generation of Americans who were encouraged to manage their own retirement savings with 401(k)s and similar vehicles. Many made investing mistakes, didn’t sock enough away or waited too long to start.

Consider:

•Median personal income of Americans 55 through 69 leveled off after 2000—for the first time since data became available in 1950—according to an analysis of census data done for the Journal by the Urban Institute, a nonprofit research organization that has published research advocating for more government funding for long-term care. Median income for people 25 through 54 is below its 2000 peak, but has edged up in recent years, and younger workers have more time to adjust retirement-savings strategies.

•Households with 401(k) investments and at least one worker aged 55 through 64 had a median $135,000 in tax-advantaged retirement accounts as of 2016, according to the latest calculations from Boston College’s center. For a couple aged 62 and 65 who retire today, that would produce about $600 a month in annuity income for life, the center says.

•The percentage of families with any debt headed by people 55 or older has risen steadily for more than two decades, to 68% in 2016 from 54% in 1992, according to the Employee Benefit Research Institute, a nonpartisan public-policy research nonprofit.

•Americans aged 60 through 69 had about $2 trillion in debt in 2017, an 11% increase per capita from 2004, according to New York Federal Reserve data adjusted for inflation. They had $168 billion in outstanding car loans in 2017, 25% more per capita than in 2004. They had more than six times as much student-loan debt in 2017 than they did in 2004, Fed data show.

Shortfall generation

A combination of economic and demographic forces have left older Americans with bigger bills and less money to pay them.

Tempted by a prolonged era of low interest rates, boomers piled on debt to cope with rising home, health-care and college costs. Interest-rate declines hurt their security blankets. Lower earnings on bonds prompted many insurance firms to increase premiums for the universal-life and long-term-care insurance many Americans bought to help pay expenses. Some public-sector workers are living with uncertainty as cash-strapped governments consider pension cuts.

Gains in life expectancy, combined with the soaring price of education, have left people in their 50s and 60s supporting adult children and older relatives. Some are likely to have to rely on professional caregivers, who are in short supply and are more expensive than informal arrangements of the past.

Then there are health-care costs. Since 1999, average worker contributions toward individual health-insurance premiums have risen 281%, to $1,213, during a period of 47% inflation, according to the nonprofit Kaiser Family Foundation. Nearly half of 1,518 workers surveyed last June by the Employee Benefit Research Institute said their health-care costs increased over the prior year, causing more than a quarter to cut back on retirement savings, and nearly half to reduce other savings.

Only a quarter of large firms offer retiree medical insurance, which typically covers retirees before they become eligible for Medicare, down from 40% in 1999, according to Kaiser. More money is coming out of people’s Social Security checks to pay for Medicare premiums and costs that the federal program doesn’t cover, Kaiser says. Medical spending accounted for 41% of the average $1,115 monthly Social Security benefit in 2013, and the percentage has likely risen since, it says.

Unexpected health costs have taken a toll on Sharon Kabel, 66, of East Aurora, N.Y. She already had trouble making ends meet after a yarn shop she owned for about 15 years failed in 2017. Then she suffered a heart attack this year.

In the store’s heyday, she employed three part-time workers. On Friday evenings, customers gathered to knit over cookies and wine. “I was like a bartender. People would come in and tell me about their children and their problems,” she says. Many customers eventually defected to the internet.

Her Social Security check is barely enough to cover the $800 monthly mortgage on the house she bought after a divorce settlement 11 years ago. She brings in another $800 a month cleaning houses, baby-sitting, walking dogs and selling yarn stored in her basement, she says. She grows vegetables and cans them for the winter.

She just started working three days a week at a garden center, a job she says will last until winter. “I live frugally. I don’t get my hair cut or go on vacations, and I drive a 12-year-old car.”

After a hospitalization, Ms. Kabel relied on friends and relatives for help. Some brought food and gift cards. Because Ms. Kabel skipped a Part D drug plan when she signed up for Medicare last year, one of her five children paid the $173 monthly cost of one prescription, she says. Another paid a $350 heating bill.

She has since secured drug coverage but owes $10,000 in credit-card debt. As a shop owner, she never earned enough to set up a tax-advantaged retirement plan.

Pension retreat

For many Americans facing a less secure retirement than their parents, the biggest reason is the shift from pensions to 401(k)-type plans.

A piano and organ maker in the 1880s launched one of the first employer-sponsored pension plans, and railroads, state and local governments, and others followed, according to the Social Security Administration. By the 1930s, about 15% of the labor force had employer pensions.

In 1935, federal officials created Social Security to offer a basic income. Pensions gained steam after World War II, and by the 1980s, 46% of private-sector workers were in a pension plan, according to the Employee Benefit Research Institute.

A seemingly small congressional action in 1978 set the stage for a pension retreat. Some companies had sought tax-deferred treatment of executives’ bonuses and stock options to supplement their pension payouts, and Congress authorized the move. The tax-law change ushered in the 401(k), allowing employees to reduce their taxable income by placing pretax dollars in an account.

In the 1980s, union strength was ebbing and a recession pressured employers to reduce pension funding, says Teresa Ghilarducci, an economics professor at the New School. Many employers deployed the 401(k) to displace pensions.

Market declines in 2000 and 2008 revealed the perils of do-it-yourself retirements, as many 401(k) participants cut back on contributions, shifted funds out of stocks and never put them back in, or withdrew money to pay bills.

Arthur Smith Jr., 61, is still feeling the impact. He consistently saved in 401(k)-type plans with various employers over the past 35 years, he says. His 401(k) got hit hard in the market crashes, he says, in large part because he invested in individual tech stocks.

“We were allowed to pick our own stocks and I jumped on some high-risk ones,” he says. His 401(k) lost about half its value early in the 2000s and lost about half again in 2008, he says. “We didn’t plan it right and lost a few times.”

He and his wife, Connie, 56, withdrew about $25,000 from the account to buy a house last year when he was transferred to Houston from New York. The account is down to about $20,000, they say, and they haven’t been able to sell their New York home, so they have two mortgages.

He has a pension from a decade working at a large corporation that he expects will generate about $500 a month. Combined with Social Security, he could earn about $3,000 a month in retirement income at age 66, which he says isn’t enough. “My ideas of retiring are gone.”

Others have been diligent savers but lacked knowledge to manage their money. “You don’t have a lot of people to coach you how to invest,” says Parline Boswell, 63, of New York City. She saved $5,000 during several years as a housekeeper in the 1990s while raising three children.

In 1998, she went to a bank for investing advice and ended up with a money-market account, which earned minimal income until 2007. She had become a hospital phlebotomist and in a conversation with colleagues learned about tax-advantaged investing.

She says she now has about $30,000 in a 403(b), a cousin to the 401(k). “That’s not enough,” she says. “I’m still working and trying to catch up.” She also helps with expenses for her mother, aged near 100, and anticipates working until 70.

Recognizing the 401(k)’s shortcomings, Congress in 2006 enacted legislation making it easier for employers to enroll employees automatically and put them into funds that shift focus from stocks to bonds as they age. Almost a dozen states have authorized state-run retirement-savings programs to cover some of the estimated 55 million private-sector workers without workplace plans, according to AARP, the advocacy group for older Americans.

Those safeguards generally came too late for Americans now in their 60s, including Linda McCord, 69, of Denison, Texas. After 15 years as a manager at a consumer-lending firm, she took a lump-sum pension payment in the late 1980s following the sale of the business, she says. None of the finance or banking jobs she held after that offered a pension.

She wasn’t concerned about her retirement because her husband had hundreds of thousands of dollars in a profit-sharing plan. She did have a 401(k) at a mortgage-origination firm in the early 2000s, but its balance was small when she left the workforce in 2003 due to health problems.

Her husband, Rusty, 63, followed in 2011 after a factory closing. They lived off her Social Security Disability Income for a couple of years and spent much of the money in his profit-sharing plan. They now live on her Social Security and his disability payments.

Money tight, Ms. McCord says she is selling parts of a collection of Star Trek action figures, dolls, yo-yos, lunchboxes and a book autographed by actor Leonard Nimoy.

She also struggles with another higher cost for her age group: life-insurance premiums. The annual premium on a policy she has owned since 1994 more than tripled over the past two years, she says, to about $2,000 this year. “I just want to scream bloody murder,” she says. “It is hurting so bad.”

She wants the $100,000 policy to pay for her funeral, to extinguish debts and to “hopefully have a little for our grandkids” left over.

Be the first to read the latest installments in our coverage of the coming retirement crisis. Subscribe by email.

Write to Heather Gillers at heather.gillers@wsj.com, Anne Tergesen at anne.tergesen@wsj.com and Leslie Scism at leslie.scism@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8

Appeared in the June 23, 2018, print edition as 'Time Bomb Looms for Aging America'."
frame of article is: other
###
article: "WASHINGTON — “They say millennials are lazy,” billboards plastered across 15 major cities declared last summer. “Retire early and prove them right.”
That sentiment, reflected in ads for the investment manager Prudential, is the stuff of a 30-year-old’s fantasy — and the Federal Reserve’s nightmare.
A young generation of aggressive savers could leave central bankers with less room to cut interest rates, which they have long done to boost growth in times of economic trouble.
To leave the work force early, millennials would need to build up massive retirement funds and consume less in the process. That hit to demand could slow growth and force rates to drop ever lower to entice spending. And if today’s workers actually managed to retire young, it would exacerbate the situation by shrinking the labor force, further weighing on the economy’s potential.
Millennials, who are roughly between the ages of 24 and 39 and have not lived through pronounced price spikes, already have the lowest inflation expectations of any adult generation. Their belief that costs will not increase could eventually slow actual price gains by making it hard for businesses to charge more. The Fed’s main interest rate includes inflation, so that would leave it with even less room to cut.
It may not come to this. Millennials could become more worried about inflation as they age, giving companies more room to lift prices. Their difficult post-recession entry into the labor market means many are laden with student debt, so it’s unclear if they will be able to retire young. But many indicate that they want to leave the work force early — an ambition that economists say could spell macroeconomic trouble if realized.
“It would lower interest rates — that’s certainly true,” said Joseph Gagnon, an economist at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. “It would be a double whammy: It directly raises savings” and “it would further reduce the need to invest in factories and offices for these people.”
Interest rates have been falling for decades, and demographics are a major factor in that decline, economists say. Once people are past middle age, they are living longer without working correspondingly later in life, so they have been saving heavily to fund extended retirements.
Millennials, already accused of killing everything from paper napkins to mayonnaise, would happily exacerbate the drop in interest rates, which baby boomers have driven to date.
Of millennial workers with an active 401(k), 43 percent expect to retire before the age of 65, based on data from T. Rowe Price. For Generation X — often defined as those aged 40 to 55 — that figure is 35 percent. While the T. Rowe Price survey targeted a privileged group, broader polls have turned up similar findings.
Members of Gen X are short on savings, so they may need to work further into old age. But younger people have time to turn things around: While they got a slow start, they are still under the age of 40. Millennials have begun saving more as they work in greater numbers and benefit from a record-long economic expansion.
There’s even a movement — Financial Independence, Retire Early, or “FIRE” — dedicated to frugality in pursuit of quitting the work force as soon as possible.
Scott Rieckens, 36, and his wife Taylor, 35, began following a FIRE plan in 2017. The couple, who have one child, ditched their leased cars and $3,000-a-month apartment in San Diego to move to Bend, Ore. They save more than 50 percent of their income and aim to have the $1.7 million they think they’d need to retire by their early 40s, though Mr. Rieckens doesn’t plan to completely stop working then.
He recently produced a documentary on the FIRE movement, released last year, which drew more than 10,000 people to screenings in over 200 cities. The audience skewed younger, Mr. Rieckens said, explaining that FIRE appeals to millennials partly because they have faced precarious jobs without pensions.
“You start to get this sense of lack of control, and fear,” he said. “You can take control of your life.”
The Rieckens may be extreme savers, but many millennials with means are prioritizing saving. According to a recent Bank of America survey, 25 percent of millennial savers had amassed more than $100,000, up from 16 percent in 2018.
They have good reason. Millennials have grown up with dire warnings that Social Security will be exhausted by the time it is their turn to use it. They came of age in the worst downturn since the Great Depression, so they are no strangers to economic insecurity.
But there’s a paradox to thrift: Saving, even if virtuous on an individual level, can cause economic trouble en masse. If ambitious cash stockpiling were to catch on, it could exacerbate secular stagnation, a term that the Harvard University economist Lawrence H. Summers repopularized to describe the low-growth, low-inflation state of many advanced economies.
When consumers save a big portion of their income, they are not spending as much on dinners out, movie nights and cars. Businesses respond by investing less in equipment and technology, and productivity stalls. Bosses are unwilling to pay their workers more for the same output, and weak pay gains further restrain spending.
Retirement saving behavior is not the only driver causing economic torpor and lower rates. Inequality has left a small number of people with more money than they can realistically spend. Slower labor force growth and more iterative technological improvements could also have an impact.
The lower interest rates that result from high and unequal saving might sound great — think cheaper mortgages — but they leave economies vulnerable to shocks. In the United States, for example, rates are now in a range of just 1.5 percent to 1.75 percent, leaving the Fed room for about six quarter-point rate cuts in a downturn. Headed into the last recession, rates topped 5 percent.
Fed officials think mass bond-buying and promises to keep rates low for longer can give them power to fight a slump. But the jury is out on whether such alternatives will add enough ammunition to make up for lost room on interest rates.
Even Ben S. Bernanke, a former Fed chair with an optimistic take on the central bank’s ability to prop up the economy in a downturn, says officials could end up in a tight spot if rates drop substantially lower.
It is anyone’s guess whether they will stabilize at low levels, rise or resume their descent.
“A continued downtrend is as likely as reversion to normal,” Mr. Summers said. “Lots of the structural forces that are driving this seem likely to continue.”
That’s what makes millennial retirement behavior so interesting: It is a wild card still, one that could slightly lift or substantially lower rates going forward.
Policy could influence how things play out. The government could nudge workers toward later retirement or ramp up deficit spending on old-age benefits. Mr. Summers’s research shows that fiscal spending is already propping rates up. Alternately, uncertainty about the fiscal future — like whether the present complacency over large deficits continues — could spur millennials to save more now.
What is clear is that rates are unlikely to head higher soon. That makes maintaining slow but stable inflation more important than ever.
Doing so is proving difficult. The Fed’s preferred inflation index accelerated just 1.6 percent over the past year. It has never sustainably topped 2 percent since the Fed formally adopted that goal in 2012.
That shortfall is threatening to derail inflation expectations. Americans who lived through the great inflation of the 1970s remember an era when services and goods were rapidly increasing in price, and they tend to have a higher outlook for future prices.
Millennials and Generation Z are a different story. Rents and tuition have gotten pricier, but computing power worth millions of dollars a generation ago now fits into a $600 phone. Free entertainment abounds. As America’s collective memories of breakneck price gains fade, the nation’s younger people have become an anchor that threatens to drag down overall expectations.
John C. Williams, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said in a speech last month that “there is still time to avert this fate.” Moving inflation up and keeping it there could convince millennials, he said.
“In this case, it’s fortunate that the young are impressionable.”"
frame of article is: other
###
article: "That’s not easy when the safe investments that pension funds usually rely on are paying less than 1 percent, a consequence of low interest rates.
CalPERS, the nation’s largest public pension plan, fell short of its goal in the fiscal year that ended June 30. Now, along with embracing riskier investments like private equity, Bienvenue is gambling on making low rates work for him, by borrowing billions of dollars in hopes of juicing the pension plan’s returns.
“We have to take more risk in some places,” he said. “...Systemically low interest rates, the net effect makes the challenge more difficult.”
CalPERS’ shift is just one example of how an era of persistently low interest rates has rippled across the economy, altering incentives while benefiting some groups and hurting others.
Consumers have snapped up 0% percent auto loans and mortgages at sub-3 percent rates. That’s helped the economy by driving sales of new homes and automobiles.
Depressed rates also have fueled a rise in corporate and government debt, aggravated trends toward greater inequality and left a wounded economy more dependent upon fiscal support from lawmakers at a time when Congress is intensely polarized.
Rates have been stuck at ultra-low levels for most of the past 12 years because of chronically weak demand in the U.S., Europe and Japan. The recovery from the 2008 financial crisis was the most anemic since World War II and — despite President Trump’s claims to have produced the greatest economy in history — the U.S. economy grew at an average rate of just 2.5 percent from 2017 through the end of last year.
Aging populations, subpar productivity growth and a once-in-a-century global health scare led the Fed earlier this year to return its benchmark borrowing rate to near zero and to resume large-scale buying of corporate and government securities. Fed Chair Jerome Powell has said rates would remain near zero at least through 2023.
Once an emergency remedy for economic collapse, ultra-low rates now are a fixture of the U.S. landscape. It may be a decade, perhaps longer, before they return to the levels seen in the 1990′s and early 2000′s, economists said.
“Yes, this is a very striking environment compared to the preceding 150 to 200 years of the modern economy, with the possible exception of the Great Depression,” said Adam Posen, president of the Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Today’s low rates reflect a shift in the way the Federal Reserve thinks about the economy. After a review last year, top Fed officials concluded that the neutral interest rate — one that neither spurs economic activity nor cools rising prices — is lower than they had believed.
With rates expected to stay low, the Fed will have less ammunition to fight recessions. In March, when the coronavirus pandemic plunged the economy into a sudden freeze, the Fed could reduce its key lending rate by just 1.5 percentage points, far less than the roughly 5 point historical average, Lael Brainard, a Fed governor, noted in a recent speech.
The Fed’s limited firepower leaves Congress with more responsibility for propping up the economy. House Democrats and the Trump administration have been locked for weeks in fruitless talks over a new round of relief spending.
“The risk here is downward spiral,” Brainard said, warning that the economy could be trapped in a vicious cycle of low interest rates, muted inflation and weak growth.
Long-term trends such as disappointing productivity gains and limited labor force growth are sapping the economy’s potential. In July, the Congressional Budget Office said the U.S. economy could expand in the long-run at an average annual rate of just 1.8 percent — down from more than 4 percent in 2000.
“It’s like a case of sclerosis,” said Nathan Sheets, chief economist for PGIM Fixed Income. “It seems everything in the economic body is slowly down and is functioning at a somewhat more restrained rate than it did 15 years ago.”
By lowering its benchmark lending rate, the Fed has made it easier for companies to obtain credit for job-creating investments. Its purchases of treasury securities early in the crisis helped ease bottlenecks in the market for U.S. government debt.
But like a life-saving drug that carries dangerous side effects, the Fed’s low interest rate policy has complicated the job of managing the economy and raised risks to financial stability.
“There are real costs to keeping rates at zero for a prolonged period of time,” Robert Kaplan, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas said in a recent speech. “Keeping rates at zero can adversely impact savers, encourage excessive risk taking and create distortions in financial markets.”
In November, the Fed warned that a prolonged period of low interest rates could damage the profitability of banks and life insurers and force pension plans to take bigger risks. The result would be to increase “the vulnerability of the financial sector to subsequent shocks,” the Fed said.
“There are fundamental reasons we are where we are. But there are unintended consequences,” said Kathy Bostjancic, chief U.S. financial economist for Oxford Economics.
The banking industry is a good example of the relationship between economic weakness, low interest rates and financial stability.
Falling interest rates meant banks charged borrowers less for their loans. The spread between what banks earned by lending and what they paid depositors for their savings — the net interest margin — fell to its lowest mark since the government began keeping records in 1984, according to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
As a result, bank profits in the second quarter fell 70 percent from the previous three months. Bank stocks, measured by the KBW index, have recovered from the pandemic crash in March only half as much as the overall stock market.
Over the past two years, new deposits have far outpaced demand for loans, according to a Goldman Sachs analysis. That reflects both the Fed’s asset purchases, which have injected large amounts of cash into the financial system, and weak demand.
As banks parked much of that $3.2 trillion inflow in cash, which earned just one-tenth what they could make by lending the money to a good corporate credit risk, their profits have shrunk.
Banks have enough of a capital buffer to ride out a renewed economic downturn, the Fed said. But the risk is an economic relapse would cause large numbers of consumer and business loans to go bad, eroding industry reserves and causing banks to restrict new lending.
“Financial stability is a first-order concern for the Federal Reserve and, going forward, a first-order risk for the U.S. economy,” said Sheets, a former Treasury Department official.
The Fed’s cut in short-term interest rates does not directly lower public borrowing costs. But investors seeking guaranteed returns this year have been willing to finance the government’s nearly $3 trillion response to the economic spiral. On Tuesday, investors asked just 0.64 percent to lend the government money for 10 years, a 59-year low in public borrowing costs.
Before the financial crisis, the government paid 5 percent.
These low rates mean that as a share of the economy, interest on the federal debt costs taxpayers a bit less today than in 2008 — even though the public debt has grown to more than $20 trillion from less than $6 trillion over that period.
By depressing the returns on risk-free U.S. Treasury securities, low rates also have encouraged investors to buy stocks. Since December 16, 2008, when the Fed cut its benchmark lending rate to near zero for the first time, the Dow Jones Industrial Average, with dividends reinvested, has gained roughly 320 percent. That’s about five times what the iShares Core U.S. Aggregate Bond exchange-traded fund, a broad bond market proxy, returned over the same period.
The rise in stocks has benefited the already prosperous. The wealthiest 1 percent of Americans own more than $11 trillion of stocks and mutual fund shares, more than 70 times the total held by the poorest half of the country, according to the Federal Reserve.
The top 1% now owns 52 percent of the equity in the U.S. up from 42 percent when the Fed first dropped rates to zero. The bottom half of the country owns a slightly smaller share of all stocks than it did 12 years ago, according to Fed data. And small savers earn almost nothing from bank accounts or certificates of deposit.
Soaring stocks have led some analysts to warn of a financial bubble. Yet, the Fed really has no choice but to keep rates low. For all of its unintended consequences, easy credit represents the only escape from an era of disappointing growth.
“The policy has severe distributional consequences,” said Posen. “Small savers don’t do well. But these same small savers wouldn’t do well if central banks raised rates and more people were unemployed.”
Still, the low interest rate era is imperiling retirement security for millions of Americans, making it more expensive for public pensions to meet their promise of guaranteed income decades in the future. The problem is especially acute for funds like the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund, which continues to count on earning 8 percent annually. The fund declined an interview request.
The low rates era has pushed fund managers to shift more assets into “alternative investments,” riskier initiatives such as private equity, hedge funds and real estate. They promise higher returns than bonds, but carry larger risks as well.
At CalPERS, Bienvenue, who holds the chief investment officer title on an interim basis, is implementing a new strategy that aims for higher returns by using borrowed money and increasing investments in private equity deals, which could be harder to sell in a sudden downdraft than publicly-traded stocks.
The fund posted a 4.7 percent return for the fiscal year that ended June 30 and has averaged 6.3 percent over the past five years, short of what’s needed.
“Whether 7 is doable or not is an open question,” said Bienvenue. “Even with leverage and even with private assets, we acknowledge that’s a tall order.”"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "DETROIT — After a prolonged recovery that culminated in two years of record sales, the American auto industry is slowing down, with fewer buyers in dealer showrooms and fewer workers on the factory floor.
Automakers said this week that sales dropped in June for a sixth consecutive month, falling by 3 percent from a year ago, a trend that analysts do not see letting up anytime soon. And as demand falls, there is less work in the nation’s auto-assembly plants — primarily those that build traditional passenger cars.
Last year, those plants hit a peak of 211,000 workers, a 55 percent increase since the depths of the recession in 2009. That figure has dropped by more than 2 percent so far this year, to 206,000 workers in April, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and could shrink further as sales continue to fall.
“There’s been a consistent reduction in plant output in the last six months, and what is ahead in the next six months could be pretty startling,” said Ron Harbour, an auto manufacturing expert at the consulting firm Oliver Wyman.Continue reading the main story
The decline signals at least a pause in Detroit’s resurgence from the dark days of the financial crisis, which General Motors and Chrysler survived only through bankruptcy and bailouts. It’s happening despite President Trump’s promises to pressure automakers to save and create good-paying American factory jobs.
Industry analysts said consumers might be pulling back on spending because of tighter credit conditions and more expensive vehicle loans. “Higher interest rates and uncertainty around fiscal policies will slow economic growth, and may become headwinds for auto sales,” said Charlie Chesbrough, an economist for the research firm Cox Automotive.
The impact on employment is uneven, however, reflecting the evolving tastes of American car buyers.
With low gas prices motivating buyers to trade in traditional cars for larger models, factories making trucks and sport utility vehicles are humming, with some producing around the clock on three shifts. Even as overall vehicle sales declined in June, sales of trucks and S.U.V.s rose about 4 percent from a year earlier.
That consumer trend is playing out in the opposite direction at plants building small and midsize cars, which are scaling back or shutting down entirely while they are converted to produce trucks and S.U.V.s.
What none of the automakers are doing is building new plants or adding a significant number of new jobs anytime soon.
“The industry has dramatically expanded employment in the United States in the last several years, but the growth is just not there anymore,” said Harley Shaiken, a labor professor at the University of California, Berkeley.
And companies are increasingly looking to build their less profitable car models outside the United States. Ford Motor, for example, said in June that it would move production of its Focus sedan to China from Michigan.
The company had previously planned to move the car to a new plant in Mexico, but canceled the project after meeting stiff opposition from Mr. Trump.
Ford’s China move will not cost any American jobs, because Focus production in Michigan will be replaced by trucks and S.U.V.s.
But the decision could inflame trade tensions. And if falling sales over all in the United States continue to cut employment in American plants, it could spur protectionist measures by the Trump administration, like imposing border taxes on imported vehicles.
Scaling back jobs in car plants is part of a newfound discipline among automakers to avoid bloated payrolls and inventories when sales start slipping.
That is a big change from pre-recession times, when the domestic automakers were too often awash in overproduction, or saddled with union contracts that funneled idled workers into so-called job banks with nearly full pay and benefits.
That program was eliminated in subsequent labor pacts with the United Automobile Workers. Moreover, the Detroit companies have also hired large numbers of lower-wage, entry-level employees with less costly unemployment benefits.
Those moves have made it easier for the companies to scale back production based on changes in the market.
G.M., for example, has reduced the number of shifts at several of its domestic plants, the most recent reduction being its announcement of cutbacks at a factory in Kansas that makes the Chevrolet Malibu midsize sedan — a segment that is rapidly declining as more buyers gravitate to S.U.V.s.
“These decisions are always tough,” said Alan Batey, the president of G.M.’s North American operations. “But at the end of the day we have to be disciplined about our production plans.”
Fiat Chrysler, for its part, has eliminated production of compact and midsize cars altogether at factories in Michigan and Illinois, temporarily laying off workers as it retools the plants to produce S.U.V.s and trucks.
About 4,200 employees at the company’s factory in Belvidere, Ill., recently returned to work after being temporarily laid off several months ago, and will begin producing a new S.U.V. model at the plant later this month.
The bright spots in the overall employment picture are the expansion of production at niche automakers like the electric-car company Tesla, and by foreign car companies including BMW, which is adding jobs at its sole United States plant, in South Carolina.
And automakers are hopeful that sales of larger vehicles will get even stronger in the remaining six months of this year, as has been the case in previous years. “Seasonal factors drive a much higher retail mix of trucks and utilities in the second half of the year, so it makes sense to make production adjustments on the car side,” said James Cain, a spokesman for General Motors.
But few in the industry expect any major job growth anytime soon. G.M., for example, recently scaled back its projections for industry sales in the second half of this year, and analysts are predicting that annual sales will fall below 17 million vehicles next year for the first time since 2014.
“We are beginning to enter a period we call the post-peak,” said Jonathan Smoke, chief economist for Cox Automotive, which operates the auto-research sites Kelley Blue Book and Autotrader.
One factory that thrived after G.M.’s bankruptcy in 2009 was its small-car plant in Orion Township, Mich., north of Detroit.
The company invested more than $500 million to refurbish the factory and begin producing subcompact cars. Last year it added production of its new battery-powered Chevrolet Bolt.
But demand for small, ultra-fuel-efficient cars has waned drastically with lower fuel prices. Despite its modern production technology, the Orion plant is down to one shift of workers, with little hope of expanding production soon.
Workers at the plant were heartened this year when G.M. added a small operation to convert Bolts into autonomous vehicles for testing purposes.
While it hardly added any new jobs, the autonomous-vehicle project was a welcome addition to a plant operating at well below capacity. “It’s great to be a part of a product launch — even if it is a small one,” said Lindsi Green, one of a handful of employees working on the self-driving prototypes.Continue reading the main story"
frame of article is: industry
###
article: "Results fueled by rebounds in Western Europe and emerging markets such as Brazil and Russia

Updated Jan. 3, 2018 12:43 am ET

Global sales of passenger cars and trucks likely surpassed 90 million for the first time in 2017, the latest indicator that demand for conventional automobiles remains strong even as driverless cars and ride sharing get increasing attention.

The results, based on preliminary data provided by WardsAuto.com, were fueled in part by a continued rebound in Western Europe and recovery in major emerging markets, including Brazil and Russia. Asian buyers are the main engine for sales growth with more than a quarter of the cars sold last year going to Chinese customers, up from less than 15% a decade ago.

The North American market is the world’s most profitable for auto makers, but American dealership traffic has slowed after several years of momentum. Analysts expect U.S. sales in 2017 to fall short of a record 2016 and are bracing for production cuts in the first quarter of this year amid further slowdown. December’s U.S. sales are due out Wednesday.

Global demand remains robust, however, with 2017’s relatively modest 2.7% growth estimate far outpacing population growth. WardsAuto.com says world vehicle sales have grown at an average annual pace of 4.1% since 2009, higher than the 1.2% population growth over the same period, according data provided by the World Bank.

The total number of vehicles in use globally topped 1 billion for the first time in 2009. That number has grown by another third in the years since, according to Wards.

The auto industry’s growth poses challenges for regulators already struggling to make increasingly congested roads safer and cleaner. Even as car companies and tech giants say autonomous cars, electric vehicles and sharing services are a way to reduce emissions and traffic deaths, governments around the world are trying to spark demand for electric cars. And the most-recent data shows highway fatalities are climbing.

Officials in China and lawmakers in the U.S.—the world’s two biggest markets—last month extended or preserved tax breaks aimed at electric cars, which represent less than 1% of global production and sales, according to IHS Markit. Officials in certain European cities and countries, meanwhile, have said they aim to ban sales of conventional combustion-engine cars in years to come.

Significant growth for electric cars remains at least five years away due to battery-range concerns and cost barriers, said Dave Zoia, director of content at WardsAuto.com. Car companies are expected to launch a spate of partial or fully electric cars by 2025 as development costs ease and charging infrastructure expands.

Government officials boosted efforts to increase EV sales via tax breaks and other incentives about a decade ago, a time when high gasoline prices and a weak U.S. economy played a hefty role in slowing global sales. Tesla Inc. and a handful of rivals have increased overall sales of battery-powered cars since then, but the increases have been overshadowed by stronger demand for conventional cars.

Global light-vehicle sales, which exclude commercial units, have surged since the U.S. financial crisis as Western Europe and North America returned to levels hit before the U.S. recession and Euro Crisis. Income growth in emerging markets, meanwhile, has created a growing class of first-time buyers and used-car shoppers in Asia.

Some of the fastest-growing auto makers in the world are based in China, including Chery Automobile Co., Guangzhou Automobile Group Co., SAIC Motor Corp. and Zhejiang Geely Holding Group Co.

SAIC in 2016 sold 285,803 vehicles, a 115% increase compared with the previous year, and Geely’s sales rose 28% to more than 1.1 million vehicles in 2016, according to WardsAuto.com.

“China is still a strong market and still a growing market,” said Mr. Zoia of WardsAuto.com. “It’s hit the next level where all the growth isn’t coming from first-tier cities. It’s expanding to second- and third-tier cities.”

As roads become more congested, they are also getting deadlier. Globally, more than 1.25 million people die each year because of road-traffic crashes, according to the World Health Organization, with more than 90% of the fatalities occurring in low- and middle-income countries where sophisticated safety gear isn’t as readily available.

Even as cars in mature markets are loaded with the latest features to assist drivers—such as lane-keeping aids and automatic braking—traffic fatalities in the U.S. had an unexpected spike recently. More than 37,000 traffic fatalities are estimated to have taken place on U.S. roads in 2016, according to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.

An estimated 18,680 people were killed on U.S. roads in the first half of 2017, according to the National Safety Council. Although that is 1% lower than deaths in the first half of 2016, it is 8% higher than the 2015 first-half estimate.

Auto makers and tech giants—spanning from General Motors Co. to Uber Technologies Inc. to Alphabet Inc.—are working on driverless-car technology aimed at reducing or eliminating traffic fatalities. But those projects remain in initial phases. Mr. Zoia said adoption of autonomous vehicles will be “slower and more limited,” with sales of fully autonomous vehicles at the retail level “a ways away.”

Write to John D. Stoll at john.stoll@wsj.com and Adrienne Roberts at Adrienne. Roberts@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8

Appeared in the January 3, 2018, print edition as 'Relentless Car Buying Crowds World’s Roads'."
frame of article is: industry
###
article: "General Motors said Monday it will close five factories and lay off nearly 15,000 workers in a move that shows the economy may be starting to slow and dents President Trump’s claim to be leading a renaissance for industrial America.
The automaker said it would save $6 billion annually by thinning its salaried management ranks, dropping thousands of American and Canadian factory workers, and emphasizing the production of larger sport-utility vehicles rather than sedans.
GM’s announcement sounded an incongruous note amid otherwise plentiful signs of U.S. economic health. The last six months have produced the economy’s best back-to-back quarters in four years. The unemployment rate is near a half-century low. And corporate profits are exceeding expectations.
[GM layoffs are another victory for capital over labor]
Yet the automaker’s overhaul is a reminder that the economic expansion, which began in June 2009, already is the second-longest since modern records began in 1854. Few economists anticipate a recession anytime soon, but the annualized rate of auto sales has fallen by 1 million vehicles since September 2017, and data on retail sales, industrial production and housing all suggest that the economy is tiring.
“We’d be very surprised to see output growth picking up further from here; all the manufacturing cyclical indicators we follow have peaked, and some are declining,” Ian Shepherdson, chief economist for Pantheon Macroeconomics, wrote in a recent research note.
The communities affected by GM’s decision are spread across the nation’s politically vital midsection.
Car plants in Oshawa, Ontario; Detroit-Hamtramck; and Lordstown, Ohio, will stop production of the Chevrolet Impala, Cruze and Volt, the Cadillac CT6, and the Buick LaCrosse next year. Transmission plants in White Marsh, Md., and Warren, Mich., also are halting operations, the company said.
Coming just weeks after Republican candidates lost several congressional seats across the industrial Midwest, GM’s action carries a stark political warning for the president. If voters conclude that Trump failed to deliver on his promise to return lost jobs and prosperity to the region, his reelection hopes could be dealt a blow.
In 2016, he won four states with significant ties to the auto industry: Wisconsin, Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania. They provided nearly a quarter of the 270 electoral votes needed for victory.
Before leaving the White House Monday for a campaign rally in Mississippi, the president told reporters he had complained to GM chief executive Mary Barra about the shutdowns.
“I was very tough,” the president said. “I spoke with her when I heard they were closing. And I said: ‘You know, this country has done a lot for General Motors. You better get back in there soon. That’s Ohio, and you better get back in there soon.’ ”
Trump said he was pressing the company to replace lost production in the factories it plans to shutter with other models, citing the Lordstown plant, which makes the Chevy Cruze.
“Their car is not selling well. So they’ll put something else — I have no doubt that, in a not-too-distant future, they’ll put something else. They better put something else in,” he said.
Trump’s ire may be linked to his repeated promises to reverse the Rust Belt jobs hemorrhage that he said had emptied the region’s factories as a result of poorly designed trade policies.
“They’re all coming back. They’re all coming back. Don’t move, don’t sell your house,” the president said during a July 2017 visit to Youngstown, Ohio. “We’re going to fill up those factories or rip them down and build new ones.”
During an October 2016 campaign rally in Warren, Mich., site of one of the targeted transmission plants, Trump promised: “If I’m elected, you won’t lose one plant, you’ll have plants coming into this country, you’re going to have jobs again, you won’t lose one plant, I promise you that.”
Ohio Sens. Rob Portman (R) and Sherrod Brown (D) slammed GM’s decision to shut down the Lordstown plant, with Brown labeling it “disgraceful” and blaming it on “corporate greed.”
GM’s bombshell news comes near the end of a year that has seen the auto industry occupy center stage in the Trump’s “America First” campaign to overhaul U.S. trade policy. Raw-material costs have soared as a result of Trump’s tariffs on imported steel and aluminum, with Ford saying it absorbed a $1 billion hit because of the president’s policies.
The new North American trade deal with Mexico and Canada includes sourcing requirements that will complicate industry supply chains, and the president also is considering imposing 25 percent tariffs on imported vehicles, a policy that would increase the cost of imported cars by an estimated $6,000 and eliminate 600,000 industry jobs, according to the American Automotive Policy Council.
Philip Levy, a White House economist in the George W. Bush administration, said the auto industry layoffs could prompt Trump to go ahead with additional trade barriers. “While he should take the GM move as a prompt to reconsider his approach, he seems much more inclined to double down reflexively,” Levy wrote in an email.
[The president may be shifting tactics in his trade fights]
In Lordstown, workers planned to pray for a miraculous reversal of the company’s decision, according to David Green, president of United Auto Workers Local 1112.
“It’s like someone knocks the wind out of you,” he said of GM’s announcement. “You lose your breath for a minute.”
About 40 percent of the local’s members voted for Trump, Green said. Now workers want to see the president keep his promises, he said.
“He came to our community and said: ‘Don’t sell your house. These jobs are coming back,’ ” Green said. “We’ve seen nothing but job losses around here.”
Indeed, even before Monday’s announcement, Lordstown was bleeding jobs. Since Trump took office, GM has eliminated two shifts and roughly 3,000 jobs at the plant, according to John Russo, a visiting scholar at Georgetown University’s Kalmanovitz Initiative for Labor and the Working Poor.
Despite a lengthy period of economic growth, the unemployment rate in the area is 5.2 percent, well above the national 3.7 percent mark.
“The costs are going to be devastating,” Russo said of the latest layoffs. “This thing is going to ripple through the economy.”
Investors’ reaction to the news underscored the Wall Street-Main Street divide that the populist president has vowed to erase. Even as thousands of American families faced a holiday season without cheer, GM shareholders saw an immediate 4.8 percent gain in the value of their shares.
To be sure, GM’s action was largely a result of shifting consumer demand rather than a sudden, economywide deterioration. “GM is making a big bet on a future that is autonomous, connected and electric,” said Michelle Krebs, an analyst at Auto Trader. “It has to be extremely profitable now to finance that because no one knows when those vehicles will be commonplace.”
Roughly 1 million of the nation’s 150 million non-farm workers are employed in motor vehicle manufacturing, according to economist Jim O’Sullivan of High-Frequency Economics. That’s about as many vehicle production jobs as 10 years ago, when the total U.S. workforce was smaller.
The overall economy is still in good shape. Small businesses remain upbeat, and payrolls are expected to continue growing, O’Sullivan said.
But the economy’s growth rate, which slowed in the third quarter to 3.5 percent from 4.2 percent in the previous three months, is widely expected to continue decelerating. The boost from last year’s tax cut and increased government spending is fading, while uncertainties and costs associated with the president’s tariffs are mounting.
“Even though times are good and unemployment is low, businesses have a pretty sober outlook about planning for the future,” economist Michael Feroli of JPMorgan Chase said. “There is a little bit of hesitancy to go all-in right now with investment.”
Danielle Paquette and Damian Paletta contributed to this report."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Output resumed its long climb in June after a plant fire depressed May results

Updated July 17, 2018 3:53 pm ET

The manufacturing sector staged a quick turnaround in June after a fire at the plant of a Ford pickup-truck supplier knocked output lower the previous month, extending a solid run of growth for U.S. industrial activity.

The fire, which occurred May 2 at a parts plant in Michigan operated by a unit of China’s Wanfeng Auto Holding Group, led Ford to idle production of its flagship F-150 and Super Duty trucks for more than a week.

* U.S. Stocks Rally; Meta Shares JumpLive Coverage, * Consumers Prop Up Economy as Higher Rates Hit GrowthApril 27, 2023, * Chinese Authorities Question Bain Staff in ShanghaiApril 27, 2023,

* U.S. Stocks Rally; Meta Shares JumpLive Coverage, * Consumers Prop Up Economy as Higher Rates Hit GrowthApril 27, 2023, * Chinese Authorities Question Bain Staff in ShanghaiApril 27, 2023, * Why No Buyer Has Emerged for First RepublicApril 27, 2023, * Lyft Says it Will Cut More Than 1,000 People in New Round of LayoffsApril 27, 2023, * Iran Seizes U.S.-Bound Oil TankerApril 27, 2023, * DeSantis’s Miscalculation: ‘Disney Is Playing the Long Game’April 27, 2023, * U.S. Sanctions Russian, Iranian Security Services Over Wrongful DetentionsApril 27, 2023, * Fire Sale: $300 Million San Francisco Office Tower, Mostly Empty. Open to Offers. April 27, 2023,

Output resumed, leading to a 0.8% increase in manufacturing output in June after a 1.0% decline the previous month, the Federal Reserve said Tuesday in a monthly report on U.S. industrial activity.

Manufacturing production has been rising since mid-2016, when rising oil prices helped reverse a hit to U.S. energy production. Manufacturing output is now up 4.2% since May 2016 and up 22% from a recession low in June 2009, according to Fed data.

It’s part of a broader rebound for the U.S. industrial sector, which has added 1.2 million jobs since March 2010. The manufacturing sector was hit hard by the 2007-2009 recession and later by a big drop in oil prices, which hurt energy production. More broadly, it has been buffeted by years of competition from low-cost countries such as China.

Several large manufacturers report quarterly results next week, including 3M Co., motorcycle maker Harley-Davidson Inc. and conglomerate United Technologies Corp. Strong results are widely expected, though investors have become mindful lately of the potential for weakening demand next year, in part because trade disputes could disrupt global growth.

For now, the long U.S. expansion, now in its 10th year and being further fueled by recent business and individual tax cuts, appears to be paying dividends for American plants that churn out cars, appliances and business equipment.

“Activity right now is hitting on all cylinders. Demand is up, production is up, [and there’s] really robust hiring overall,” said Chad Moutray, chief economist at the National Association of Manufacturers.

Surveys show businesses feel confident in the economic outlook. Global growth, while slowing in some pockets, remains solid. Also, business investment has risen, a sign companies are spending to increase productivity. In the first quarter, investment in structures rose at a 16.2% seasonally adjusted annual rate, while investment in equipment climbed at a 5.8% rate.

Strength in business investment owes much to the rebound in the price of oil. Oil prices stopped falling in early 2016, then began to move higher, resulting in increased investment from energy firms that rippled throughout the U.S. economy.

Many larger industrial companies and manufacturers are expected to report strong second-quarter results in the next two weeks. Companies that sell parts and supplies to manufacturers are also benefiting from the improvement in the sector.

“A strong economy consumes our stuff more rapidly,” said Holden Lewis, chief financial officer for Fastenal Co., a distributor of screws, work gloves and other industrial supplies used at factories and construction sites.

Fastenal’s second-quarter sales rose 13% from a year earlier, and net income increased 42%. Fastenal’s customers typically don’t maintain large inventories of the company’s products, making it a bellwether of current demand.

Bendix Commercial Vehicle Systems LLC, an Elyria, Ohio, vehicle-parts supplier, has seen demand for its brakes and other products surge over the past year and a half as the transportation industry has picked up steam. To meet that demand and maximize capacity, the company has increased investment in machinery and has added a rotation that allows it to run full shifts seven days a week.

Over the past 15 months, Bendix has added about 700 employees at its North American production operations, a 30% increase.

“Generally, as the economy has started to pick up, we’ve seen almost extraordinary demand in some cases,” said Michael Hawthorne, chief executive officer at Bendix.

Still, the manufacturing recovery from the 2007-2009 recession and years of intense international competition is incomplete. Output is 3.5% below a 2007 peak, and factories were running at 75.5% of their capacity in June, below an 81% level that prevailed in the 1990s and signaled a healthier balance of supply and demand.

Manufacturing growth could again slow if trade disputes continue to escalate. Already, higher metal prices have put pressure on some manufacturers that use aluminum and steel in their products to cut costs or raise prices.

“We see some of the domestic mills taking advantage of the pricing umbrella being raised,” said Michael Happe, CEO of recreational-vehicle manufacturer Winnebago Industries Inc. “We’ve had to go to the market a bit more frequently and a bit more aggressively with some price increases as of late.”

Other companies say U.S. tariffs on imported steel and aluminum are helping them generate higher profits against foreign competitors.

“It’s given us relief. We’re able to get some margins back,” said Jim Piperato, president of Benada Aluminum LLC, a Florida-based producer of aluminum framing for patio and pool enclosures.

Mr. Piperato said the company, owned by private equity firms Big Shoulders Capital and ABGB Capital, recently increased production capacity by 50% to expand into the door and window frame market.

“Our business has been extremely strong.” he said. “Most of the customers I’ve spoken to say there’s no end in sight.”

Write to Sarah Chaney at sarah.chaney@wsj.com and Bob Tita at robert.tita@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8

Appeared in the July 18, 2018, print edition as 'Manufacturing Sector Hits a Sweet Spot'."
frame of article is: industry
###
article: "Fiat Chrysler Makes $1.84 Billion Net Loss in First Quarter
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles NV reported a €1.7 billion ($1.84 billion) net loss for the first quarter, as lockdowns related to the new coronavirus pandemic have taken a toll on car sales and factory output globally.
Revenue fell nearly 16% to €20.5 billion compared with the first quarter of 2019. The company lost money in nearly every business unit with the exception of North America, where continued strength in pickup-truck sales led it to post an adjusted operating profit of €548 million for the January-March period.
Like other car companies, Fiat Chrysler has withdrawn its full-year guidance saying it is unable to provide more direction given the uncertainties surrounding the coronavirus pandemic.
Fiat Chrysler reported an adjusted loss of €0.30 earnings per share for the quarter, worse than analysts’ estimates of positive €0.05 earnings per share.
BNP Paribas Profit Drops as Structured-Products Business Takes Hit
BNP Paribas reported a drop in first-quarter net profit as France’s largest bank set aside new provisions to prepare for a flood of customers to default on their loans because of the coronavirus pandemic.
Like crosstown rival Société Générale, companies that canceled their dividend payments dealt a big hit to BNP Paribas’s equity derivatives unit. The move wiped €184 million ($200 million) from BNP Paribas’ structured products revenue this quarter.
Banks world-wide have been setting aside billions of dollars to cover bad loans and have been shoring up capital by canceling dividends and share buybacks.
The Paris-based lender, the biggest by assets in France, said net profit fell by 33% to €1.28 billion in the three months ended March 31.
U.S. Trade Deficit Likely Widened in March, Economists Say
Economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal expect the U.S. government to report that the country’s trade deficit widened in March as the coronavirus pandemic upended supply chains and slashed consumer spending.
The trade gap expanded by 11.2% in March to $44.4 billion, as exports fell more than imports, the economists estimated.
“We’ll see the beginning of what’s going to be a sustained fall in trade,” said Brad Setser, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations.
Several factors have depressed global trade. First, the emergence of the coronavirus in China caused factories there to shut down, disrupting supply chains world-wide. Then the virus spread globally, prompting many businesses to close operations, which caused job losses, and many governments to issue stay-at-home orders, which held down consumer spending. The lockdowns have likely produced a global recession, further reducing demand.
DuPont Swings to Loss, Posts Lower Sales
DuPont posted lower sales and swung to a loss for the first quarter as the Covid-19 pandemic led to higher demand for personal protective equipment but also disrupted supply chains.
The maker of nylon and other materials for the auto industry posted a net loss of $616 million, or 83 cents a share, compared with a profit of $521 million, or 69 cents a share, in the same quarter last year.
Sales grew in its electronics-and-imaging and nutrition-and-biosciences segments, but were offset by declines in the transportation-and-industrial, safety-and-construction and noncore segments.
DuPont said it increased the production of Tyvek garments by more than nine million a month, double the amount produced for any prior crisis.
Coronavirus Vaccine Enters Human Testing in U.S.
Researchers have begun injecting healthy volunteers in the U.S. with an experimental coronavirus vaccine developed by Pfizer and partner BioNTech, in the latest study exploring a potential defense against the disease.
Scientists at the New York University Grossman School of Medicine and the University of Maryland School of Medicine have begun giving people the first of four vaccine candidates. The trial will help evaluate whether they are safe, which produces the strongest immune response and what the dose should be. Pfizer plans to advance the candidate that proves most promising.
Results from the 360-person study could come as early as June, but the vaccine would still need to undergo testing in more patients, said Kathrin Jansen, Pfizer’s head of vaccine research and development."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Coronavirus: US gives 10 times the amount of money to WHO than China
Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.
As coronavirus continues to cripple almost every country on earth, questions are being raised over the relationship between the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and the top brass at the World Health Organization (WHO).
Earlier this week, President Donald Trump accused the specialized United Nations Agency of acting too slowly on the escalating pathogen, and deemed it "very China-centric."
He affirmed in both a tweet and later at a press briewofing on Tuesday that his administration is "going to look into" the money U.S. taxpayers give to WHO – and potentially freeze it – given that Americans are the largest donors.
CLICK HERE FOR COMPLETE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE
WHO LEADER TEDROS ASKED TO EXPLAIN CHINA TIES BY GOP MEMBERS OF HOUSE OVERSIGHT PANEL
So exactly how much is China forking out to have attained such an apparent influence? Well, nowhere near the United States.
"In short, the total contributions of China versus the US is $86 million versus $893 million," David Maxwell, a senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies (FDD), told Fox News. "The U.S. contributes nearly ten times the amount China does."
Here is how it works.
WHO operates on a two-year budget, and invoices members with two annual payments. It receives its money – usually totaling around $4.5 billion per year – through two streams. The first is referred to as "assessed" contributions, which is considered core funding from its member states, and are based upon expected amounts scaled by population and income. These make up just under 20 percent of the total budget. The second stream is "voluntary", provided by member states, private individuals and organizations, and makes up the bulk of WHO's revenue.
"Nations are assessed membership fees based on their gross domestic product and population size," Dennis Santiago, a global risk and financial analyst surmised. "Nations and foundations can also make additional voluntary contributions to the general fund and for special designated projects, including outbreak and crisis response."
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION UNDER THE MICROSCOPE: WHAT WENT WRONG WITH CORONAVIRUS?
The United States pays the highest assessment fee to the WHO. The March 2020 WHO financials indicates that the United States' current year assessment is $57,883,460. This is almost twice China's 2020 assessment of $28,719,905 to the organization's annual budget, the second-largest assessment in WHO's budget.
Based on WHO financial reports as of March 2020, China committed to an assessment of $28,719,905 to the organization's annual budget. The current year amount is presently outstanding. China appears to be up to date in its payments; there are no amounts in arrears from prior years on WHO's report.
The same financials sheet indicates that the United States 2020 assessment is $57,883,460 USD, roughly double that of China's. The U.S. also has prior owed balances of $41,284,915 that have not been remitted. The total amount outstanding for the U.S. is $99,168,375; around one-half of the total $257,470,000 WHO is awaiting as of the end of March 2020. The U.S. and China have the two most substantial contribution assessments to WHO in 2020, followed by Japan and Germany.
WHO DIRECTOR FACES CALLS FOR RESIGNATION OVER HANDLING OF CORONAVIRUS, CHINA
According to WHO financials, China Assessments have been as follows.
2016 $23,914,320
2017 $23,914,320
2018 $18,948,900
2019 $18,948,900
2020 $28,719,905
2021 $28,719,905
"The history of assessments by WHO for the PRC shows the numbers did dip in the 2018-2019 period but have since grown to for the 2020-2021 period," Santiago explained. "Curiously, the WHO is supposed to make assessments to member nations based on their GDP and population size. China and the United States have similar GDPs, and China's population is four times larger than the U.S. But China's annual assessments are one-half that of America's."
He also pointed out that the U.S. also has a balance of an additional $41,284,915 from prior years that have not been remitted, for an outstanding U.S. total funding assessment of $99,168,375.
"But it is in voluntary contributions to WHO where the United States truly shines," Santiago pointed out. "In 2017, the latest year for which WHO has compiled reports, the United States government donated a whopping $401,108,929 USD, 40% of the total donations by member states that year. China's donations were a much smaller $10,584,499 USD in 2017."
Indeed, more than 80 percent of WHO's budget is made up not from assessed contributions but from voluntary ones – of which the United States again contributes the most, and China gives none, and the US gives the most.
WHO CHIEF'S QUESTIONABLE PAST COMES INTO FOCUS FOLLOWING CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE
In 2017 – the most recent data for voluntary contributions available – shows that the U.S. totaled more than $400 million of additional support above the almost $30 million already given per year under assessed contributions. Moreover, WHO data shows that the U.S. is its largest financier – giving more money than the United Nations itself – followed by South Korea, Australia, the Gates Foundation, and then Japan. The rest of the top ten is rounded out by donations from GAVI Alliance, National Philanthropic Trust, United Kingdom, New Zealand, Bloomberg, and the European Commission.
An examination of WHO'S voluntary contributions donor list from the period 2012-2013 showed that 20 entities made up 81 percent of all contributions. At the top, this time was the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, seconded by the United States, and then the United Kingdom and Ireland, the Gavi Alliance, Canada, Australia, Norway, and the UN Central Emergency Response Fund.
China was nowhere to be found in the top 20.
"The coronavirus crisis has exposed the CCP's strategy to infiltrate and dominate international institutions for two main reasons: to ensure they act favorably toward the PRC and to prevent admittance of Taiwan to any international organizations," Maxwell said. "At the very basic level, it is about ensuring these organizations accept and adhere to the 'One China' concept."
In total, the total comparisons have been tabulated here:
China Contributions 2019:
Assessed: $75,790,000
Voluntary: $10,189,000
Total: $85,979,000
US Contributions 2019:
Assessed: $236,912,000
Voluntary: $656,092,000
Total: $890,004,000
DO COUNTRIES WITH HIGH RATES OF MALARIA HAVE FEWER CORONAVIRUS DEATHS?
Brett Schaefer, senior research fellow in international regulatory affairs at the Heritage Foundation, further highlighted that nearly 90 percent of China's contributions were assessed (mandatory).
By contrast, 73 percent of US contributions were voluntary.
"China's contributions have been rising over the years because its economy and per capita income levels have been rising, and the formula for assigning assessed contributions is based on that data. However, despite its growing economy, China still only gives roughly a tenth of the amount that the US provided because the US is far more generous in providing voluntary contributions."
From Schaefer's lens, China's political clout is based partially on its growing financial contribution and the perception that it is a rising power, but also on its historical diplomatic relationships with developing countries.
"China's contribution is growing, and WHO bureaucracy does not want to alienate a government that may one day be its largest contributor," he observed. "Similarly, some governments are leery of angering China who they see as a future superpower. Finally, as with most international organizations, the biggest decisions in the WHO are made by the member states, including choosing the Director-General. Each member state has one vote, so China's influence with developing countries carries great weight through sheer numbers."
"What you really see when examining the financials of organizations like WHO is how generous the United States is to humanitarian causes. America's government and philanthropy dominate the equation constantly," Santiago added. "In all honestly, humanity would be in the Dark Ages were it not for the largess of America and its people.""
frame of article is: government
###
article: "China is powering through an epic wave of coronavirus infections, setting the stage for a rebound in consumer and business activity that could prevent the global economy from tumbling into recession.

In recent days, Wall Street analysts at firms such as Goldman Sachs and Capital Economics have upgraded their forecasts of Chinese growth, citing signs that the coronavirus outbreak is peaking sooner than expected.

The pace of China’s reopening, after the lifting of its draconian zero-covid policy last month, will shape the global outlook for growth and inflation. Stock prices for U.S. companies that serve the Chinese market, such as the casino operator Wynn Resorts, would benefit from a smooth rebound, as would American attractions that appeal to Chinese tourists.

Since early December, when the Chinese government abandoned its zealous lockdown strategy, the coronavirus has sickened tens of millions of people and overwhelmed hospitals. In Henan province, with more people than Germany, nearly 9 in 10 residents are sick, officials said last week.

A critical test looms this month, when workers in coastal factories head back to their rural villages to celebrate the Lunar New Year, potentially igniting a second round of infections in areas where the medical system is less developed.

Despite the dangers, there are signs that the economy is stirring. Subway ridership in major cities is rapidly returning to normal. Consumers who accumulated savings while shut in their homes for much of the past year have money to spend. And the government is rolling out policies to support a rebound.

China’s ability to recover from nearly three years of self-imposed isolation “is very likely the single most important factor for global growth in 2023,” Kristalina Georgieva, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, told reporters last week. “It matters tremendously.”

Indeed, the global economy’s other main engines are far from firing on all cylinders. The U.S. economy, despite a strong end to 2022, will struggle this year as higher interest rates bite, according to the World Bank’s latest forecast. Europe is in recession, and Japan is projected to eke out just a 1 percent growth rate.

As for China, the World Bank forecasts growth of 4.4 percent this year, and some private estimates are even higher. Goldman predicts a 5.2 percent gain. “Evidence of a rapid China reopening is accumulating,” the investment bank said in a recent note to clients.

Still, it will take time for the Chinese to reestablish their pre-pandemic routines, including links to the outside world that the government severed in hopes of keeping the virus at bay. The next few months may bring a stop-and-go recovery before a more widespread resumption of activity in the spring, analysts said.

Even with a smooth Chinese reopening, the global economy faces a year of anemic growth, according to World Bank and IMF projections.

“It does provide a big impetus. But we’re not expecting China to have this huge growth surge and ride to the rest of the world’s rescue,” said Ben May, the director of global macro research for Oxford Economics in London.

Chinese policymakers are doing what they can to help. With domestic inflation low, the People’s Bank of China — unlike central banks elsewhere — cut rates last year and may cut them again. The government also has resumed lending to some major property developers, abandoning for now its efforts to trim the industry’s overall debt.

Signs of China’s awakening already are evident. After being largely confined to their homeland for the past three years by onerous quarantine and testing requirements, Chinese tourists are hitting the road.

Nearby destinations such as Thailand and Hong Kong are the immediate beneficiaries. But American tourist attractions also are anticipating the return of the Chinese.

“The booking inquiries are going through the roof. In the first days after the policy changed, there was a thousandfold increase on search engines in China,” said Adam Burke, the president of the tourism and convention board in Los Angeles, one of the most popular destinations for Chinese tourists.

Two Chinese airlines — Air China and Hainan Airlines — plan to resume daily nonstop service between Beijing and Los Angeles this month, he added.

Almost 1 million Chinese visitors are expected in the United States this year, up from 359,000 last year, according to the U.S. Travel Association.

That’s an impressive increase. But the total is still just a fraction of the more than 3 million who arrived annually in the pre-pandemic years. And the industry does not expect a recovery to that level until 2026, according to Geoff Freeman, the association’s president. Visa approvals and required coronavirus testing also will keep international travel from rebounding as quickly as domestic journeys.

Before the pandemic, China trailed only Britain and Japan as a source of international visitors for the United States. But the typical Chinese tourist stays 14 days — compared with the 10-day average — and spends freely. In 2019, China was worth more than $33 billion to U.S. airlines, hotels, entertainment venues and universities.

“Chinese travelers are absolutely critical to the travel economy in the United States,” Freeman said.

How quickly Chinese consumers return to their customary spending habits will determine the economy’s trajectory. Consumer confidence in China last year plunged to an all-time low amid the reimposition of lockdowns during the rise of the coronavirus’s omicron variant.

But household bank balances are up 42 percent, or $4.8 trillion, since the start of 2020, according to Andy Rothman, an investment strategist at Matthews Asia in San Francisco. That suggests Chinese consumers could unleash an amount exceeding Britain’s entire economy as they resume spending.

Some analysts worry that a resurgent China will consume more oil, driving up global prices, making inflation worse, and forcing the Federal Reserve and other central banks to keep raising interest rates.

Bank of America expects a barrel of Brent crude, the global benchmark, to reach $110 in the third quarter this year, up from around $80 today.

But even as Chinese oil demand increases, China is expected to resume exporting up to 1.5 million barrels per day of refined products, such as diesel fuel, which should take some pressure off retail prices, according to Citigroup. China had halted those exports in late 2021 to address domestic supply concerns.

Much of the increase in consumer spending also will be on domestic restaurant meals, movies, sporting events and other in-person activities that have been off-limits during the lockdowns, rather than on products from other countries. U.S. brands such as Starbucks and Yum Brands, the owner of Kentucky Fried Chicken, could benefit.

Luxury retailers also expect a boost from higher Chinese sales, within China and elsewhere. The stock of Louis Vuitton’s owner, LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton, has gained almost 13 percent since Beijing scrapped its coronavirus restrictions Dec. 7.

Still, China is emerging from a period of troubling weakness. Last year’s 3.2 percent annual growth rate was the lowest in decades, excluding the pandemic year of 2020. Repeated lockdowns demoralized the population and put a chokehold on consumers, small businesses and factories.

An unprecedented flurry of anti-government protests occurred in Beijing and other cities late in the year.

“2022 was a really dismal year,” said Mary Lovely, an economist with the Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Factories slumped in December for the third consecutive month, according to the official purchasing manager’s index from the National Bureau of Statistics. Youth unemployment sits at a record 19.9 percent. And an overbuilt property sector drowning in debt acts as a drag on investment.

China’s longer-term outlook is even more challenging. The nation’s working-age population is shrinking. And the property sector, which makes up 15 percent of the economy, remains vulnerable to a price decline that could ignite broader financial problems, according to BNP Paribas.

Although China’s economic growth this year is expected to outpace that of the United States, Europe and Japan, its performance will fall short of its contribution to the global recovery from the 2008 financial crisis. Thanks to massive government spending on an infrastructure program, the Chinese economy grew in 2010 by more than 10 percent, roughly twice the pace that is considered likely this year.

“There will be a positive spillover from China. But it’s not going to be as intense as in past Chinese recoveries,” said Nathan Sheets, the global chief economist at Citigroup.

China's population dropped last year for the first time since 1961. The historic turn marked the start of a looming demographic and economic crisis. (Video: Reuters)"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Instead, the United States’ rivals, notably China and to a lesser extent Russia, have been stepping up to offer aid to other stricken nations, a role long fulfilled by the United States in crises stretching back to World War II.
Planeloads of Chinese medical equipment, masks and protective gear have been landing in Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Ukraine, Iran and Iraq, among others. Jack Ma, China's wealthiest man, donated test kits, masks and protective suits to each of Africa’s 54 countries.
African heads of state took to social media to profusely thank him, and headlines of major newspapers gushed with gratitude. “The perception across much of the continent today is that the Chinese are stepping up to deliver the kind of public goods that the U.S. used to provide," said Eric Olander, the director of the China-Africa Project.
To the extent that the United States has engaged with the rest of the world on the coronavirus issue, it has mostly been to trade barbs with rivals over what name should be used to describe the virus — Trump insists on calling it the “Chinese virus” — and who is to blame for its spread.
On Wednesday, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo’s insistence on calling it the “Wuhan virus” torpedoed a virtual meeting of G7 foreign ministers convened to discuss the crisis. Trump participated Thursday in a virtual summit of the larger G20, which agreed to inject up to $5 trillion into the international economy and establish funding for a global effort to find a vaccine. The U.S. government has not yet said how much it will contribute.
“In international crises, America has always been the country to which other countries have turned for leadership and to steer the ship. And now, which country is looking to the United States? No one,” said Elisabeth Braw of the London-based Royal United Services Institute.
America’s disengagement on the coronavirus fight is part of a broader retreat from the world. From the Paris climate change accord to multiple trade agreements, the Trump administration has unwound decades of U.S. leadership on a range of issues.
But such is the severity of this crisis that America’s absence could permanently impact its standing, ceding ground to an ascendant China in the great game of global influence, analysts said.
“I do wonder whether this really is an inflection point in the international system,” said Nathalie Tocci, the head of the Italian Institute of International Affairs and a former foreign policy adviser to senior European Union leaders.
“Here in Italy it is going to change for good the perception of who is leading in the world, and it’s not the United States,” she said. “It’s so strong what is happening. It’s so powerful and it’s so traumatic. The emotions that it ignites today are going to be engraved in the national narrative.”
There’s an element of opportunism in some of the gestures by the United States’ rivals. Huawei, the Chinese technology giant accused by the United States of acting as a branch of China’s intelligence agencies, has seized the opportunity to promote its brand to stricken Europeans at a time when their governments are weighing whether to adopt its high-speed 5G cellular network, despite US requests not to do so.
The company has delivered thousands of masks and other equipment bearing the Huawei logo to hard-hit countries, which may help win support for its 5G network once the crisis subsides.
“China is sending medical supplies, but it is it a good Samaritan or is it simply doing it to exploit tensions in the Western alliance?” asked Braw. “It’s very opportunistic and it’s clear China senses a vacuum.
“But unless the Trump administration ups its game, this could be the moment in world history where the trend pivots in favor of China,” she added.
Russia has likewise sensed opportunity in the vacuum of American leadership, sending a cargo plane of medical aid to Italy earlier this week. But Italian officials told Italian media that the offer was unsolicited and the equipment and medicine sent didn’t match Italy’s needs.
U.S. officials say they have offered assistance. U.S. troops based in Italy helped send and deliver hospital beds, mattresses, stretchers and other equipment to the Italian province of Lombardy, the ground zero of Italy’s coronavirus crisis.
In late January, when China’s outbreak was at its peak, the U.S. government said it was sending more than 17 tons of medical equipment there. In early February, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced an additional $100 million in assistance “to China.”
The State Department modified that in later statements, saying the aid would go to high-risk and developing countries, with no mention of China. A Chinese official last week said that China had received “not $1” from the United States.
Some of the $100 million has been committed to the World Health Organization and other multilateral institutions, said Pooja Jhunjhunwala, acting spokeswoman for the U.S. Agency for International Development.
The agency has designated 25 countries to receive direct assistance, most of them in Central and Southeast Asia. Delivery of the pledged donations, to the extent it has taken place, has remained largely invisible on the world stage, however.
Rajiv Shah, who as head of USAID coordinated the U.S. response to the 2014 Ebola virus outbreak centered in Africa, stressed the need for international cooperation.
“It has to be all of the United States, and has to be all of the world,” Shah, now president of the Rockefeller Foundation, told Bloomberg TV on Monday.
During the Ebola outbreak, he said, “America always leads those kinds of coalitions. It is our resources, our expertise, our technical capacity and our standing in the world that allows us to do that. I fear that’s not happening today.”
Both Russia and China have also been promoting disinformation about the coronavirus, countering the language of top American officials such as Trump and Pompeo that the coronavirus is a Chinese virus by advancing conspiracy theories, such as that the pathogen may have been developed in American laboratories, said Braw. A European task force set up to combat Kremlin disinformation has reported counting 110 such cases from Russian sources between Jan. 22 and March 19.
Meanwhile, the chaotic American response to the spread of the virus in the United States is undermining its reputation as a global leader in science and technology. TV footage of New Yorkers queuing in the cold for scarce virus tests has been broadcast worldwide, accentuating the sense that America can’t manage its own coronavirus epidemic, let alone lead other countries out of theirs.
American enemies have seized the opportunity to take digs. “Spend it on yourself,” said Iran’s Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, as he rejected an offer of U.S. assistance to help Iran fight the coronavirus. “You have shortages yourself.”
The United States has now expanded the availability of testing, said Taufiq Rahim, a Dubai-based global health expert with the New America organization. But masks, protective gear and other medical equipment remain in critically short supply in some parts of the country, and with coronavirus infections increasing at the rate of more than 10,000 a day, the United States looks set to become the world epicenter of the covid-19 disease.
“Overall it looks like the United States is on the path for becoming the most endemic country for the coronavirus, more than China, more than Italy, more than any other country,” he said.
As other countries impose drastic lockdowns and stay-at-home orders, the Trump administration is seen by many overseas as an outlier.
“Even India, with a population of 1.3 billion, is going into lockdown. Yet at the leadership level, the United States is talking about opening up the country when it hasn’t even fully locked down,” Rahim said.
“Very few countries today see the U.S. as part of the solution, whereas in the past it was the natural point of comparison, or a country to imitate,” Luis Rubio, head of the Mexican Council on Foreign Relations.
Moreover, he said, Trump’s at-times dismissive approach to the coronavirus may be encouraging other populist leaders who remain resistant to taking harsh and economically difficult measures to confront the epidemic. Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro called lockdowns ordered by his country’s mayors a “crime” and invoked Trump in comments minimizing the seriousness of the coronavirus.
Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador is another leader who has been encouraged by Trump’s cavalier approach, Rubio said.
“The U.S. administration also prolonged, rather than taking the bull by the horns. It wasted several days or weeks and showed the way to many people, like President López Obrador, that it was possible to pretend it wasn’t going to hurt,” he said.
Birnbaum reported from Brussels. DeYoung reported from Washington. Max Bearak in Nairobi, Robyn Dixon in Moscow, Shibani Mahtani in Hong Kong and Mary Beth Sheridan in Mexico contributed.
Trump has no qualms about calling coronavirus the ‘Chinese Virus.’ That’s a dangerous attitude, experts say."
frame of article is: government
###
article: "The halting Chinese recovery offers sobering lessons for U.S. policymakers about what is shaping up to be a more protracted economic convalescence than the White House wants, according to business executives and economists.
“A V-shaped recovery seems to be really difficult to envision,” said James Green, senior adviser at McLarty Associates and a former U.S. diplomat in Beijing. “The lesson of the Chinese experience is: It’s going to be slow going.”
In late January, as the coronavirus began galloping across China, the government in Beijing imposed an unprecedented lockdown on the 60 million people in central Hubei province. The quarantine, later broadened to other areas, eventually succeeded in curtailing the spread of the illness. But it sent China’s economy, the world’s second-largest, into a tailspin with investment declining in the first two months by nearly one-quarter.
The United States waited to act, as the president played down the seriousness of the virus and insisted his administration had it under control. Only in March did many governors impose stay-at-home orders on almost all Americans.
Sign up for our Coronavirus Updates newsletter to track the outbreak. All stories linked in the newsletter are free to access.
China began reopening parts of its economy in mid-February. As the pandemic nears its peak in the U.S., Trump administration officials are racing to do the same.
Larry Kudlow, the director of the National Economic Council, said the economy could be reopened “in the next four to eight weeks” and would perform like “a dynamo” when it was.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin told Fox Business he anticipated “a very strong rebound later this year.”
But China’s two steps forward, one step back performance shows no recovery can gain steam before the pandemic is brought under control and measures to prevent a future outbreak — including widespread public health monitoring — are implemented. Even if those conditions are met, the collapse of many businesses and enduring changes in consumer behavior are likely to reshape the economy, altering investment, spending and saving patterns.
“The U.S. economy is going to rebound, once some of the restrictions are lifted. But it’s going to take a long time to get back to where it was,” said economist Mark Williams of Capital Economics in London. “When you fall a really long way, you can bounce. But I wouldn’t expect the U.S. to be back on the path it was on for at least another year or two.”
Before the coronavirus reached the United States in late January, the Federal Reserve projected the economy would expand by 2 percent in 2020 with unemployment ending the year at a half-century low of 3.5 percent.
Instead, U.S. output over the next two years will be $3.3 trillion less than what was anticipated and the jobless rate will touch a post-World War Two record 15 percent, economists at Goldman Sachs said Monday. In a sign of how long the return to normalcy will likely take, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office projects the unemployment rate at the end of 2021 will be 9 percent.
The president and his team are more upbeat. In his daily White House briefings, Trump has repeatedly predicted the economy will perform “like a rocket ship” once the virus is corralled.
“I think we're going to have a tremendous rebound. There’s a great energy and a great pent-up demand,” he said April 1, adding that before the pandemic, the U.S. had “the best economy in the history of the world.”
Most economists expect the mandatory shutdown now affecting most Americans to cause a historic decline in second-quarter output. Goldman Sachs, for example, expects the economy to shrink at an annual rate of 34 percent by the end of June. Even with a sharp rebound in the third quarter, only a bit more than half of the fall in output will be made up by year’s end, the bank said.
“This will be a slow recovery overall as many workers will be displaced and businesses adapt to a period of lost revenue,” Bank of America economists wrote in a recent client note.
Roughly 10 million workers lost their jobs in the last two weeks of March, and several million more are expected to join the jobless ranks this week. The soaring unemployment rate will cut into consumer spending once the economy reopens, and high debt levels may force many companies to trim their investment plans. On Tuesday, Exxon Mobil said it would reduce capital spending by 30 percent or $10 billion.
The president is eager to prove the doomsayers wrong. After initially floating the idea of lifting social restrictions in time for worshipers to attend Easter masses this weekend, Trump bowed to public health advice and embraced social distancing.
But speaking Sunday at the White House, he again betrayed impatience with the economic toll of the anti-pandemic campaign.
“We want to get our people back to work. Everybody wants to be back. We want to open up our country as soon as possible,” the president told reporters.
Trump may establish a task force to consider how the economy should be brought back to life, which could evaluate proposals for a rolling reopening based on geographic or demographic characteristics.
Recent comments by his top aides reflect the president’s frustration.
“We can get a pretty good snapback, a good snapback. That’s my hope … The sooner we begin to reopen, the faster that snapback’s going to be,” Kudlow told reporters Monday.
China’s experience, thus far, offers a cautionary tale.
As the Chinese emerged from quarantine, factories reopened more quickly than restaurants and retail outlets. Any business that relies on person-to person contact is suffering, as consumers remain nervous about catching the sometimes fatal respiratory illness.
“People are back at work. But they’re not shopping. They’re not going to restaurants. They’re avoiding public places,” Williams said.
Large state-owned factories have returned to work more quickly than the small and medium-sized businesses that are the backbone of both the Chinese and U.S. economies. Like the Trump administration, which has rolled out a new $349 billion loan program, Chinese officials sought to help small businesses stay alive. Beijing suspended social security and medical fees that are automatically deducted from companies’ accounts and leaned on landlords to defer rent payments, said Andy Rothman, an investment strategist with Matthews Asia.
“The recovery is well underway and seems to be picking up steam,” he said.
Investors have been cheered by signs of returning strength in the world’s second-largest economy. The official purchasing managers index rose in March to 52 from February’s record-low of 35.7. In key manufacturing provinces such as Guangdong and Zhejiang, officials report 100 percent of large enterprises have resumed operations, according to Trivium, a Beijing-based consultancy.
Yet roughly nine weeks after the authorities began urging people to return to work, many Chinese factories are just treading water. They are open for business, but lack orders. Major exporters are especially troubled since their U.S. and European customers have been idled by the pandemic.
Lingering Chinese weakness is evident in a Capital Economics index that blends measures of power station activity, property sales, subway ridership and long distance travel. In mid-February, as the government began pushing people to resume work, the index stood at 22 percent of the year-ago level. By mid-March, it reached 52 percent, but today it is only 59 percent.
It may be July 1 before operations are back to normal, according to the German Chamber of Commerce in China. The Chinese economy this year will grow less than 3 percent, its weakest performance since 1976, S&P Global Ratings said Tuesday.
“The shape of China’s recovery is still unclear. The government is trying to architect a fast and bold recovery, but as factories ramp back up, they are finding demand for their products outside of China has dissipated,” said James McGregor, chairman of APCO Worldwide’s greater China business.
Port activity is almost back to precrisis levels in Shanghai, though it remains just 40 percent of normal in Wuhan, according to data from HawkEye 360, a Herndon company that tracks radio frequency transmissions from cargo vessels.
Public health policies remain an unavoidable economic impediment. James Zimmerman, an attorney with Perkins Coie in Beijing, recently had to dispatch an associate attorney for a mandatory court appearance in Hangzhou. But when she returned to Beijing after that one-day trip, she faced a mandatory 14-day self-quarantine.
“Things are not quite back to normal,” Zimmerman wrote in an email. “Isolation and quarantine are still very much a part of daily life in China.”
China’s return to work requires health safeguards that are beyond what is customarily found in U.S. workplaces. Chinese workers routinely wear masks and accept routine temperature checks before being allowed into office buildings or factories.
“That’s probably what we’ll have to go through,” said Craig Allen, president of the U.S.-China Business Council. “Even after we bend or flatten the curve, we’ll have to keep in place -- probably longer than we’d like -- a system of monitoring and very strict application of public health rules.”
Whenever Americans resume their precrisis routines, they will inhabit a different economy than the one that existed just a few weeks ago.
Some businesses will have expired, unable to survive an indefinite revenue drought. Consumers may opt to save more and spend less. Governments will likely stockpile more medical supplies and install fever scanners in public buildings and transit hubs, said Torsten Slok, chief economist for Deutsche Bank Securities.
But the chief lesson from the Chinese experience is one that Americans may resist: Patience is the key to regaining prosperity.
“The Chinese economy took a huge hit. The government focused first and foremost on restraining the outbreak,” said Scott Kennedy, senior adviser at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. “They have gradually turned on the taps. It’s just going to take some time.”"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Stock Rally, Real-Estate Rebound Boost Market for Second Houses

April 2, 2014 11:09 pm ET

Sales of vacation homes are surging again, the result of rising wealth in higher-income households and renewed confidence in the housing market.

The number of second homes acquired for part-time personal use jumped 30% last year to 717,000 homes, according to an annual survey by the National Association of Realtors. The gain was the largest since the association started tracking second-home sales in 2003.

Although the number of second homes sold last year is well short of the high point of nearly 1.1 million in 2006, last year's jump signals a rapidly changing sentiment about the value of residential real estate, which just a few years ago was considered a poor investment amid the broad market bust.

Economists note that the vacation-home market was a beneficiary of last year's big gains in the stock market and rising home values, bringing buyers more wealth and confidence. The Standard & Poor's 500 index of stocks posted a 30% increase last year, its largest since 1997. The median price of an existing home rose by 11.5%, the largest gain since 2005, according to the Realtors group.

That combination gives rise to the classic "wealth effect" in which people feel more wealthy and therefore more willing to spend. More households also sought to diversify their wealth by transferring their gains from stocks and other investments into real estate.

Rising prices and favorable currency-exchange rates spurred Calgary residents Sherry and Phillip Hickey to buy a second home in Mesa, Ariz., last year to escape the Canadian winters. The couple, represented by Realtor Kris Anderson at Your Premier Team at RE/Max Excalibur, spent $357,500 on a three-bedroom, three-bathroom home where they intend to spend roughly five months a year.

"We just saw that things were looking better in the Phoenix market and prices were going up," Ms. Hickey said. "We wanted to get in before they went up too high and to make use of the Canadian dollar at par" with the U.S. dollar at the time.

Ms. Hickey, 56 years old, and her husband, 63, who own a small business in concrete forming, spent several decades of savings on the purchase.

"The housing market is in full-blown recovery mode," said Joseph LaVorgna, chief U.S. economist for Deutsche Bank Securities. "People are much more confident in the sector as a long-term investment [as shown by] their decision to purchase an extraordinarily discretionary item, a second home."

Overall, vacation homes accounted for 13% of U.S. home sales last year, up from 11% in 2012, according to the Realtor association survey. Their median price last year was $168,700, up 12.5% from 2012.

Regionally, the South accounted for most vacation home sales last year—41%—likely due to its mild weather. Next was the West, with 28%; the Northeast, with 18%; and the Midwest, with 14%. Florida tends to propel the South to the forefront of the vacation-home market.

"The market definitely picked up for vacation homes in the Tampa Bay area overall last year," said Tony Baroni, who leads five real-estate agents at Keller Williams Realty in the Tampa Bay, Fla., area. "Our market had gone down so much [in price] that, even when it started recovering, buyers still felt like it was a great value."

The second-home surge also underscores a disparity in the market. More-affluent, move-up buyers trading into their second- or third-generation home have carried the U.S. real-estate market in recent years as would-be first-time buyers have been hobbled by strict mortgage-qualification standards.

Also, several measures show that household wealth reached new heights last year. Pay gains have favored better earners; U.S. Census Bureau data show that the top 60% of U.S. earners saw household income rise by 2.3% or more in 2012 while the bottom 40% saw gains of less than 1.8%.

Deutsche Bank's Mr. LaVorgna pointed to the U.S. ratio of household liquid assets to liabilities, meaning a comparison of readily sellable assets such as cash and stock against debt such as mortgages. In last year's fourth quarter, household liquid assets were 2.6 times liabilities, the highest ratio since 2000, he said. The latest ratio well exceeds the long-term average of 2.1 times since 1980.

Even so, "from a macroeconomic perspective, it's a positive thing," said David Berson, chief economist for Nationwide Insurance. "While the benefits of second homes may accrue disproportionately to the upper half of the income distribution, there are a lot of people who build these homes" and benefit from ancillary spending tied to them.

Meanwhile, the Realtor association's survey, which covered 2,008 households, also found that second-home purchases by investors declined last year by 8.5% to an estimated 1.1 million. Such a drop has been widely forecast as home prices rise and the number of foreclosed and distressed properties declines. The survey doesn't include purchases by large, institutional investors.

Write to Kris Hudson at kris.hudson@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "There are signs that pockets of the U.S. housing market are heating up, particularly in the suburbs and fashionable exurbs, to which people have been fleeing to escape the coronavirus.
Some first-time buyers are feeling a sudden hurry to buy, fearing higher prices if they wait. But they are also worried about the long-run outlook for home prices.
For the United States, according to the S&P/CoreLogic/Case-Shiller National Home Price Index, adjusted for inflation, real home prices rose 45 percent from February 2012 through May 2020, the latest data. (I helped to create the index but have no financial interest in it.) Other sources indicate that prices remain high. That is a remarkable record, considering that the United States is grappling with the coronavirus pandemic, a major recession and social upheaval. In that stretch, there were no down years.
It would be easy to assume that the boom times for housing will go on forever, but that would require ignoring the disaster that led to the most recent great financial crisis, a little more than a decade ago.
Recall some recent history. Real home prices rose 75 percent from February 1997 to a peak in December 2005, apparently unaffected by the 2001 U.S. recession and the steep stock market decline of 2000 to 2002. Delusions of eternal price increases for houses — thought to be much more reliable than stocks — sprouted in that era, not so long ago.
But housing prices crashed 36 percent from their 2005 high, to a low in February 2012, and the impact of that decline spread into other financial markets and crippled the global economy.
For a home buyer in 2005, who put up life savings for a 10 percent or 20 percent down payment, the price decline amounted to a devastating loss by 2012. If they had been able to hold on until now, their real home value would probably be mostly restored, but no one would want that 15-year experience again.
I’m not making a prediction. This is not 2005, and many things have changed. The work-at-home trend today, aided by online communications, is notably different. If one does not have to commute to work in a city, there is so much land out there in America that many new suburban houses can be built, supply can increase to meet the demand, and home prices in the suburbs may never rise as much as they did in the previous boom.
But still, looking at the market cycle has to be instructive. In an impressive new book, “The Great American Housing Bubble,” Adam Levitin of Georgetown University and Susan Wachter of the Wharton School summarized six possible causes of that epic boom-and-bust cycle. Succinctly put, they are:
Consumers’ “irrational exuberance,” referring to an analysis that I made in the second edition of a book with that title in 2005.
The “fair lending and affordable housing policy” starting with the 1977 Community Reinvestment Act, which made it easier for poorer people to buy houses.
Federal Reserve cuts in interest rates, which may have set off price speculation.
A global savings glut — excessive saving worldwide, given available investment opportunities, a theory proposed by Ben S. Bernanke, the former Fed chairman, in explanation of low interest rates in the early 2000s.
Excessive creation of securities that promoted subprime lending.
A shift in mortgage lending to “unregulated private-label securitization by private investment banks,” a theory developed by the two authors.
All these factors, as well as Federal Reserve decisions affecting mortgage rates, are part of the story of the 1997 to 2012 boom and crash. So are the difficulties faced by the Fed and other regulators, as described in a new and imposing 595-page volume, “First Responders,” edited by Mr. Bernanke and two former U.S. treasury secretaries, Timothy Geithner and Henry Paulson.
All of the theories point to a fragile boom-time mind-set that underestimated home price risk, whether by home buyers, investors, mortgage originators, securitizers, rating agencies or regulators.
So let us dig a little deeper. What caused all these errors back then?
Ultimately, it came down to unwarranted optimism and excitement about home prices. There were, during the 1997-2005 boom, constellations of narratives about housing that grew contagious over time, even transcending national borders. Intense “real estate voyeurism” — envious online snooping of other peoples’ home values — became common. The exuberant mind-set displaced thoughts of price declines.
Stories abounded of “flippers,” people who made fantastic profits buying, fixing up, and selling homes within a matter of months. The so-called experts in those days hardly ever mentioned that the high rate of increase in home prices might one day be reversed.
In retrospect, it appears that there was a political component to the housing craze. President George W. Bush said the United States was becoming an “ownership society” in his successful 2004 re-election campaign. He promoted the idea of homeownership in a way that flattered the apparent wisdom of people who bought houses.
Newspaper articles shortly after Mr. Bush won became much more comfortable with the idea that something akin to an “ownership society” was the country’s future, part of a longer trend that defined the “American dream” as owning a home. In that atmosphere, people rarely even considered the possibility that home prices could ever fall.
Starting just before the 2005 peak, however, the news media started discussing a new idea, the existence of a “housing bubble” for single-family homes, whose prices had become obviously high. Before that, there just wasn’t much talk about the idea that a bubble could be forming in the market for single-family homes. That sudden change is worth remembering. It is a model for what might happen again one day.
That’s not where the United States is now. The prevailing narratives are different and the underlying economic situation is dominated by the coronavirus pandemic. Furthermore, there tends to be a lot of momentum in home prices. The boom that started in 2012 could conceivably go on for years.
But there is a chance that inadequate public support for homeowners in these difficult times will result in a rash of foreclosures, personal bankruptcies and houses dumped on the market. From the intensity of public reactions to current social and economic problems, it seems possible that the United States is nearing a turning point in the thinking of many people, and this could affect the housing market and the economy. If President Trump and his “Make America Great Again” narrative continue to polarize the country as the election grows near, confidence in the solidity of housing prices could drop sharply.
This poses a dilemma for prospective home buyers, who must make life-changing decisions with imperfect knowledge of the future. History suggests that it might be wise to avoid investing in too expensive of a house or in taking on too much risk.
Yet the value of a good place to live for a family cannot be quantified. If you can afford the cost, a house that you will live in for years to come may be worthwhile, regardless of the short-term shifts in the market.
Robert J. Shiller, Sterling Professor of Economics at Yale, shared the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science in 2013."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Despite an uptick in homes on the market and weakening home sales across the country, home ownership is out of reach for a growing number of middle-class buyers, according to a recent report from real estate brokerage Redfin.
An analysis of U.S. homes on the market in 2017 and 2018 found that the number of affordable homes for sale has decreased in 86 percent of metro areas (of 49 included in the study), even as the number of homes on the market grew. While buyers normally benefit from better availability in competitive housing markets, it doesn’t help if the majority of available homes are priced for the wealthy.
“For the past few years, home prices have gone up faster than wages,” said Daryl Fairweather, chief economist at Redfin. “That kind of growth really isn’t sustainable. At a certain point, there won’t be enough buyers left for the homes left on the market.”
Home ownership has long been at the heart of the American dream, a means of accumulating wealth and securing financial stability. But ownership rates have fallen dramatically since the financial crisis -- coming in at 64. 4 percent in the third quarter of 2018, according to data from the U.S. Census Bureau -- a telling sign that the traditional markers of middle-class life are getting tougher and tougher to hang onto.
To estimate affordability, researchers used the median income in each metro area, applied standard interest rates and assumed a 20 percent down payment and a monthly mortgage payment of 30 percent or less of the buyer’s gross income. Even adjusting for 10 percent down payment, just over half of homes on the market were affordable, according to the study.
In Seattle, the share of affordable homes fell 14 percent from 2017 to 2018, leaving only 46 percent of homes within the reach of middle-class families. In San Jose, Calif., the share of affordable homes fell from 26 percent to 14 percent over the same time.
According to the National Association of Realtors, existing home sales in December were down 10.3 percent year over year, the biggest drop since the housing market bottomed in 2011. At the same time, the median home sale price was $223,900, according to Zillow’s home value index.
Current conditions mirror what happened after the housing market collapsed. Prices tumbled and property was abundant, but the only people who could afford to buy were those who hadn’t been crippled by the financial crisis. Years later, a booming economy has yet to restore buying power to middle-class families, as mortgage rates and home prices have climbed. Prices surpassed their pre-crash peak in October 2017. And according to a December report from ATTOM Data Solutions, last quarter was the nation’s worst for home affordability in over a decade.
In metro areas, part of the issue is a lack of public investment in affordable housing, Fairweather said. The problem is often exacerbated in cities that serve as hubs to major tech companies, where an influx of highly paid workers has ratcheted up prices and cost of living. It’s fueling a flight from the coasts, as increasing numbers of people move inland in search of affordability.
Some states and cities are taking steps to correct this. California’s Gov. Gavin Newsom has an ambitious plan to oversee construction of 3.5 million new housing units by 2025. In November, the Minneapolis City Council signed off on $12 million in affordable housing investments throughout the city. Private companies are even stepping up to the plate -- and Microsoft announced it’s offering up $500 million to build and protect affordable housing in Seattle.
The housing market is a cornerstone of U.S. economic output, accounting for over 12 percent of the country’s GDP in 2017. With the economy deep into an expansion, there’s been a rise in first-time home buyers, but if conditions persist, many may be priced out and forced to rent instead.
“Now the economy is doing better and more people are looking to buy a home for the first time," Fairweather said, "but they’ve missed the boat on affordable deals.”"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "The advance of wealthy households, while middle- and lower-income Americans struggle, is reshaping markets for everything from housing to clothing to beer.

Updated Jan. 28, 2015 10:36 pm ET

WOODINVILLE, Wash.—Five years ago, Quadrant Homes churned out starter houses in the Seattle area with an average sales price of $269,000 and the marketing slogan, “More House, Less Money.”

But facing a debt-burdened middle class and rising land prices, Quadrant has since exchanged entry-level buyers for customers free of credit worries and ready to splurge. Its new slogan, “Built Your Way,” accompanies homes with vaulted ceilings and gourmet kitchens that last year sold for an average price of $420,000. “We used a lot of market research to tell us that our old model wasn’t going to work,” said Ken Krivanec, Quadrant’s chief executive.

* Carlson’s Vulgar Messages About Colleagues Helped Seal His FateApril 26, 2023, * First Republic Bank Shares Sink More Than 40% After Earnings ReportApril 25, 2023, * Google Is All About Cost Control NowApril 25, 2023,

* Carlson’s Vulgar Messages About Colleagues Helped Seal His FateApril 26, 2023, * First Republic Bank Shares Sink More Than 40% After Earnings ReportApril 25, 2023, * Google Is All About Cost Control NowApril 25, 2023, * Microsoft Revenue Growth Stays Low as Economic Concerns Hurt DemandApril 25, 2023, * Biden Announces 2024 Re-Election Bid, Setting Up Potential Trump RematchApril 25, 2023, * Senators to Introduce Bill Mandating Code of Ethics for Supreme CourtApril 26, 2023, * McDonald’s, PepsiCo, GM Flex Their Pricing PowerApril 25, 2023, * IKEA Redesigns Its Bestsellers, Starting With the Billy BookcaseApril 25, 2023, * TikTok Ban in Montana Faces Speed Bump as Governor Seeks ChangesApril 25, 2023,

The emergence of a two-tiered U.S. economy, with wealthy households advancing while middle- and lower-income Americans struggle, is reshaping markets for everything from housing to clothing to groceries to beer.

“It’s a tale of two economies,” said Glenn Kelman, chief executive of Redfin, a real-estate brokerage in Seattle that operates in 25 states. “There is a high-end market that is absolutely booming. And then there’s everyone in the middle class. They don’t have much hope of wage growth.”

The recession blew holes in the balance sheets of all U.S. households and ended a decadeslong loosening of credit for middle-class borrowers. Now, credit is tight, and incomes have been flat or falling for all but the top 10th of U.S. income earners between 2010 and 2013, according to the Federal Reserve.

American spending patterns after the recession underscore why many U.S. businesses are reorienting to serve higher-income households, said Barry Cynamon, of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Since 2009, average per household spending among the top 5% of U.S. income earners—adjusting for inflation—climbed 12% through 2012, the most recent data available. Over the same period, spending by all others fell 1% per household, according to Mr. Cynamon, a visiting scholar at the bank’s Center for Household Financial Stability, and Steven Fazzari of Washington University in St. Louis, who published their research findings last year.

The spending rebound following the recession “appears to be largely driven by the consumption at the top,” Mr. Cynamon said. He and Mr. Fazzari found the wealthiest 5% of U.S. households accounted for around 30% of consumer spending in 2012, up from 23% in 1992.

Indeed, such midtier retailers as J.C. Penney, Sears and Target have slumped. “The consumer has not bounced back with the confidence we were all looking for,” Macy’s chief executive Terry Lundgren told investors last fall.

In luxury retail, meanwhile: “Our customers are confident, feel good about the economy in general and their personal balance sheets specifically,” said Karen Katz, chief executive of Neiman Marcus Group Ltd., last month. Reported 2014 revenues of $4.8 billion for the company are up from $3.6 billion in 2009.

Revenue for such luxury hotel chains as St. Regis and Ritz-Carlton rose 35% last year compared with 2008, according to market research firm STR Inc. Revenues at midscale chains such as Best Western and Ramada were down 1%.

On grocery aisles, the recession and its aftermath boosted sales of economy brands. At the high end, Whole Foods Market Inc. reported record sales per gross square foot last year.

“Demand bifurcated,” said Jason Green, chief executive of the Cambridge Group, a growth strategy firm that is part of Nielsen NV. “The familiar stuff my middle-class family had in the pantry, those are under significant pressure.”

In the grocery market’s middle tier, Safeway Inc., the second-largest supermarket chain in the U.S. was purchased last year by the private-equity group that owns Albertsons, the fifth-largest grocery retailer. Company officials said the deal would allow the companies to reduce costs—and lower prices for customers—as they fend off competition from low-price outlets and high-end stores.

In the cold case, sales of premium lagers are up 16% since 2007 after adjusting for inflation, while sales of economy brands grew 8%, according to research firm Euromonitor International. Sales of midprice beers are down 1%.

The trend hit auto makers some years ago, when BMW AG’s former chief executive Helmut Panke described the U.S. market as an hourglass: lots of demand for budget and luxury brands but little in between.

Steve Bates, general manager of BMW Seattle for the past 12 years, said new-car sales at his dealership were up 25% last year, while used-car sales were flat. The M4 series, a sporty coupe priced from $64,000, has been “selling out as soon as it touches the ground,” he said.

Then there are consumers like Vicki Oliver, 68 years old, of Temecula, Calif. She bought a used Hyundai Sonata last year to replace a wrecked 1995 Ford Explorer. Ms. Oliver and her husband, a real-estate agent, added onto their home two years ago so her daughter and son-in-law, a general contractor, could move in with their family.

“That was a way to make things work in hard times,” Ms. Oliver said. Caribbean cruises and trips to Florida are now memories. “We haven’t done that for years,” she said.

The housing market illustrates how weakness among middle-class consumers holds back the U.S. economy. Homes are generally the biggest purchase Americans make. Housing dollars ripple through the economy by triggering spending on appliances, furniture and landscaping.

For the first time, U.S. builders last year sold slightly more homes priced above $400,000 than those below $200,000. As a result, the median price of new homes exceeded $280,000, a record in nominal terms and 2% shy of the 2006 inflation-adjusted peak.

Total sales last year, however, were up just 1% compared with 2013, and more than 50% below their average from 2000 to 2002, before the housing bubble.

New homes are also getting bigger. The median U.S. home was more than 2,400 square feet in the third quarter of 2014, a 20% increase from early 2000 and a 10% increase from the peak of the housing market in 2006.

In Seattle, the median new-home size topped 2,500 square feet last year, a record, according to research firm Metrostudy Inc. Since the market hit bottom in 2011, sales of new homes priced above $600,000 have tripled, while sales below $400,000 are down 16%, according to CoreLogic DataQuick.

Builders boost profits selling more expensive homes. But less construction overall means fewer new jobs and reduced total spending.

“Over the long haul, I worry that you can’t run our housing market, which depends on volume, on affluent buyers alone,” said Diane Swonk, chief economist at Mesirow Financial in Chicago.

Young households have been slow to buy homes because of the tough job market. Many would-be buyers can’t save enough for a down payment or don’t earn enough to qualify for a mortgage. Student debt holds others back.

A typical household, for example, would need around $60,000 in cash to make a 20% down payment on the median-priced new home in the U.S. To qualify for a mortgage, they would need good credit and to show an annual income of about $45,000, assuming little other household debt. A government-insured loan in this example could call for an $11,000 down payment but would require an annual income of $60,000.

Lisa and Nathan Trione are looking for a house in Denver big enough for their five children. But there is little in their price range: $250,000 and under.

“You’re already intimidated by the process,” said Ms. Trione, a 28-year-old paralegal and office manager. “And then you see this huge price, and you say, ‘I’m not ready to do that right now.’”

Ms. Trione is paying off debt she incurred while earning her associate degree. She also is trying to raise her credit score, which, she said, fell during a series of early financial missteps.

Well-heeled customers, meanwhile, have their pick of mortgages. At the same time, some banks have pulled back from federally insured loans that allow for smaller down payments.

“We would like to build a smaller, higher-quality and less-volatile business,” Marianne Lake, chief financial officer at J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., told investors last year.

With fewer potential customers, builders have largely abandoned the entry-level market. “If a builder can make money on something, he’ll build it. The problem is that they can’t make money at the entry level,” said John Burns, of Irvine, Calif., a consultant to builders.

But rentals, the low-end of the housing market, are booming. Apartment construction has neared its fastest pace since 1989. Two of the nation’s largest home builders, Toll Brothers Inc. and Lennar Corp., have both launched multifamily construction divisions, each with around 5,000 units in the pipeline.

“We all wished we had a big apartment portfolio through this downturn,” said Douglas Yearley, Toll’s chief executive, during an earnings call last year.

With sales plunging in 2009, Quadrant called in a research firm that concluded more buyers might materialize if the company built more expensive homes. “When it’s data driven, the courage to make a remarkable change is easier than when you’re using your gut,” said Mr. Krivanec, the company’s chief executive.

Quadrant, a unit of TRI Pointe Homes Inc., was finishing seven homes per workday in 2004. They now finish less than two of the more expensive houses a day. But the share of buyers who back out of a deal, typically because they can’t get a loan, is down 10% since 2010.

To serve more higher-end buyers, Quadrant opened a design studio two years ago that lets buyers choose from dozens of cabinets, countertops, tiles and flooring. Some new buyers spend nearly twice as much on such upgrades, the company said, which adds to the profitability of home sales.

Common design features now include a walk-in closet and bathroom nearly as big as the master bedroom. Kitchens have a walk-in pantry.

On a recent Tuesday afternoon on Little Bear Creek Place, a cul-de-sac in this Seattle suburb, electricians, landscapers and framers worked on some 23 Quadrant home sites.

Nearby, Nick and Adriana Stoll unpacked boxes in their new four-bedroom home. The home is twice the size of the 1,200-square-foot, one-bedroom apartment they rented in nearby Bellevue.

The Stolls customized almost every feature and finish, including hinges on kitchen cabinets that prevent the doors from slamming shut. “I’m typically the kind of consumer where I make a quick decision,” Mr. Stoll said. “But when it comes to your home, well, we stared at 100 countertops for an hour.”

The Stolls survived the recession and have prospered. Mr. Stoll purchased a Seattle condominium in 2008, the day before learning he was losing his job at Washington Mutual, the thrift sold to J.P. Morgan after it was seized by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.

Mr. Stoll changed jobs twice before he was recruited in 2011 to work at a technology company. He broke even on the sale of his condo last year. “Other people encountered problems where maybe it’s student loans or credit cards or car payments,” he said, “and we have none of that.”

The couple put 20% down on their new home, which cost $579,000. Ms. Stoll works as a client associate for a large financial services company.

Growth in new home sales this year will depend, in part, on whether builders revive their interest in first-time buyers.

Two years ago, D.R. Horton Inc., the nation’s largest home builder, launched Emerald Homes, a luxury division. Last year, the company rolled out Express Homes, a division that pioneered no-frills housing for the entry-level market.

Mr. Krivanec, Quadrant’s CEO, said he doesn’t see a return to his company’s former model. There are enough people with good-paying jobs in the area—at Boeing, Amazon and Microsoft—to keep sales going, even it means building fewer homes. “We like where we’re at,” he said.

Write to Nick Timiraos at nick.timiraos@wsj.com and Kris Hudson at kris.hudson@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "SYDNEY — One Saturday in March, in the suburbs north of Sydney, around three dozen people gathered on a lawn outside a smallish two-bedroom apartment.
They were taking part in an idiosyncrasy of the Australian economic system. Here, selling a home tends to be an almost festive gathering, in which potential buyers show up for an auction and neighbors stop by to watch the spectacle — and quietly calibrate how much their own homes might be worth.
On this muggy day, almost all of the assembled crowd turned out to be gawkers; only four people actually raised their bidding paddles at any point. After bidding opened at 750,000 Australian dollars (about $532,000 in the U.S.), the action started slowly. Twice, it seemed to be petering out as the auctioneer, Andrew Robinson, nearly banged his final gavel, only to be extended with one more bid. Finally a young couple whose agent lobbed in a 930,000 Australian dollar ($661,000) offer won the day.
It reflected a wheezing Australian housing market. Prices have fallen since the country’s banks tightened lending standards in mid-2018 and the Chinese government made it harder for its citizens to buy property abroad. Not too long ago, the number of interested parties might have been double.
“Twelve to 18 months ago, it would have sold for 1.1 million,” said Mr. Robinson, with Belle Property, as he packed up his gavel and papers and prepared to head to his next auction on a day he would conduct eight of them. “There was more of a frenzied atmosphere, more people bidding who just didn’t want to lose out.”
I had flown 16,000 miles not to study economic malaise, but its opposite: the remarkable resilience of the Australian economy, which has gone nearly 28 years without a recession. The government, with elections to take place next month, recently announced an expected surplus in the next budget year.
Surely this grand economic success story would hold lessons for the United States and the rest of the world, right?
Yet instead of giddy enthusiasm, what I found in Sydney was a pervasive sense of caution and wariness — and not just involving real estate, though housing does loom large in discussions about the economy. In conversations with Australian businesspeople and college students, economists and government officials, I detected no sense of triumphalism.
An entire generation of young adults has grown up without experiencing a protracted downturn. But in Australia, as I came to learn, nobody really acts as if they’re the stars of an unprecedented three-decade success story. They’re aware that the good times could end. The mood is more practicality than pessimism.
America is on the verge of its own economic milestone: The current expansion is on track to reach its 10th birthday this summer, which would also put it on record as the nation’s longest streak without a recession.
During the decade I’ve spent chronicling that growth as an economics writer, a persistent whisper has been: How long can it go? The run has been uneven, underwhelming and repeatedly on the verge of unraveling, including scary moments in 2010, 2015 and this past December. Seemingly every commentator without a good cliché blocker has referred to it as “long in the tooth.”
Even the language of economics suggests that an end to the good times is inevitable. If you’re going to call it the “business cycle,” things can’t just keep getting better forever. Some of history’s great economic thinkers have theorized that downturns are as essential to the workings of the economy as the seasons are to agriculture.
Is Australia a unique case, a beneficiary of some good economic luck that cannot be replicated in the rest of the world? Or is the nation onto something, and are there lessons in economic policy that are applicable everywhere?
When I landed there in mid-March, in the waning days of the Australian summer, that’s what I hoped to figure out.
Good luck and good policy
Ask Australian economists about this golden run, and almost all will say it has been driven partly by good luck and partly by good policy.
The luck part can’t be minimized. Beneath the ground of large stretches of Australia are the iron ore and coal that have been the raw materials behind China’s long economic boom. Above ground lies the wheat and cattle that have helped feed China’s rapidly growing middle-class population.
China’s growth, in other words, has created a tailwind that has boosted Australia’s economy for much of this period. And if the Chinese economy ever truly tanks, even the most skilled policymakers in Australian will have a hard time preventing a recession.
But China’s gravitational pull can explain only so much. For one thing, other countries nearby have had recessions, some severe, in recent decades. And there are a long list of policy choices that enabled the long Australian boom even as otherwise similar economies sank.
One episode is particularly telling. In 1997, an East Asian financial crisis walloped the economies of countries like South Korea, Thailand and Indonesia. These nations were major buyers of Australian exports. The value of the Australian dollar started to fall on global currency markets, putting the expansion at risk only six years in.
On the other side of the Tasman Sea, New Zealand’s central bank responded to the same problem by raising interest rates. After all, a falling New Zealand dollar indicated a lack of confidence in the currency and implied that inflation would soon rise.
At the Reserve Bank of Australia, by contrast, officials concluded that the falling value of the Australian dollar reflected shifting economic fundamentals that were ultimately healthy — part of how the Australian economy could adapt to faltering demand from East Asia.
Rather than raise interest rates to try to prevent a falling currency, they viewed a falling currency as the key to navigating the peril — by making Australian exports more competitive in the United States and Europe, for example.
“The government was uncomfortable if the exchange rate went too low, because it looked like a sign of no confidence,” said Malcolm Edey, who was the central bank’s head of economic research at the time. “We had a good monetary framework in place, we stuck to it, and we didn’t panic when the exchange rate moved around along the way.”
Sure enough, New Zealand fell into recession in 1997 and 1998, while Australia endured only a period of subpar growth. Good policy, it turns out, has a way of creating good luck. And it wasn’t the only time.
Boring banking and avoiding the global financial crisis
If you had looked around the world circa 2006, you would have seen a number of countries where housing prices had soared into potential bubble territory, including the United States, Britain and Australia.
But two years later, while the United States and Britain were in a severe recession and financial crisis, Australia experienced only a single quarter of contraction. Why the difference?
The answer seems to be how the financial industries of those countries were structured and regulated. To understand that better, I sought out a tutor, one who turned out to have an unlikely background: David Morgan, a former child actor and professional Australian Rules Football player who later became one of the country’s leading bankers.
After a wave of deregulation in the 1980s, Australian banks took on ever-more-risky lending, especially for commercial real estate, and got into new business lines overseas in which they had no obvious competitive advantage. When that asset bubble popped and a recession arrived, the banks came near failure, and there was a wholesale firing of top bank executives.
It was a matter of “going through the furnace, and coming out tempered by experience,” said Mr. Morgan, who was chief executive of Westpac, one of Australia’s major banks, during the crisis. “We were adamant that we would go into the next shock with the least risk and the most resilience, and would not engage in any more offshore frolics.”
The banks — with prodding from regulators — reformulated themselves to take a more conservative and domestically focused approach to lending. After that near-death experience, there remained the “Big Four” banks that together control about 80 percent of deposits; they are not allowed to merge with each other.
The banks also did not engage in the kind of expansionist strategy that had gotten them in trouble in 1991. They did not open huge offices in Hong Kong, London or New York, nor get in the business of creating the complex mortgage securities that were the nexus of the financial crisis.
Good regulation was part of it. “They were good quality regulators; the public sector was getting good people,” Mr. Morgan said. Both major political parties have tended to be tough on banks, and there is a single powerful regulator rather than a patchwork of them as in the United States.
But just as important was the sense among bank leaders that they would need to be ready when the next downturn came.
It’s not as if Australia’s banks are perfect actors. A royal commission established to examine the industry found widespread misconduct, including abuses of customers, in a report issued this year.
But they have focused on lending to Australians, especially for home mortgages, and held those loans on their own books. No doubt Australia has missed out on some opportunities by not hosting the big, complicated banks that operate worldwide and do more sophisticated forms of finance. Sydney does not have the concentration of high-paying finance jobs that London and Hong Kong do.
But having a conservative, domestically focused, highly concentrated banking system meant that Australia wasn’t stuck importing other countries’ financial contagions when crises hit.
During the global financial crisis, Australia suffered from plummeting demand for its products. But a nicely designed fiscal stimulus — combined with a falling Australian dollar and an assist from aggressive stimulus by China — helped the country regain its footing rapidly and avoid the mass economic pain found in so much of the world.
The pessimism of 2019
If there’s anyone you would expect to be bullish, it might be the young adults entering the work force, who have never lived through a recession. But among them — as with other Australians who don’t occupy the halls of government or financial power — you find angst and uncertainty rather than boom-time optimism.
“I think there will be a recession within the next 10 years,” said George Ye, 25, who is studying for a master’s degree in data science at the University of Sydney. “I feel like sentiment is, we might have gotten to a peak. Things have gone so well for so long that the things we need to buy are getting more and more expensive,” especially housing. “I think the generation of people born 10 years prior to me are much more confident than I am.”
“I’m pessimistic,” said Freya Zemek, 24, an employee at the university. “I think we’re probably looking at a recession in 2020. Consumer confidence isn’t very high. The signs aren’t looking great, and I think it’s the sort of tightrope situation where we could be next for a recession. It’s only a matter of time. Nothing goes on forever.”
Housing especially seems to be in the opposite of a sweet spot. It’s still too expensive, especially in booming Sydney and Melbourne, for young people. Yet the prices are well below those from a couple of years ago, leaving recent buyers sitting on paper losses.
But just maybe, the contrast between a pessimistic mood and a long record of economic success isn’t as contradictory as it may seem.
Are recessions really necessary?
In November 1990, the Australian treasurer (and later prime minister) Paul Keating described a painful downturn then underway as “the recession we had to have.”
His point was that excesses in a lending and credit boom, combined with high inflation, meant that the Australian economy needed the wrenching experience of a downturn to rid itself of those excesses. It was also a horrible political gaffe, a comment that went over poorly in a country then burdened with an 11 percent unemployment rate.
But the question of whether he was right is profound — one that economists can still debate.
The great economic thinker Joseph Schumpeter argued that recessions served an essential purging mechanism enabling a society to become richer over time. Through business failures, capital is redeployed to emerging high-growth industries. In this thinking, recessions play a cleansing effect, clearing the way for the future.
Hyman Minsky, another 20th-century economist, argued that long periods of financial stability could breed complacency: The longer a nation goes without a downturn, the more risky behavior will build up in the economy, making the eventual downturn worse.
Those theories sound plausible. Data to support the case is a little harder to find. In fact, there is some evidence that recessions actually cause lasting damage to a country’s economic potential — that they hurt, rather than help — by thrusting people out of the work force unnecessarily and causing their skills to atrophy. Research shows that people who enter the work force during a recession take a hit to their earnings even decades later.
There have also been long periods when the Minskyite story has seemed not to apply, notably in the decades after World War II in the United States.
“I think Australia’s experience shows that you don’t need recessions to clean out the system, but it does show that what you need is strong, clear policy settings from governments,” said James Pearson, the chief executive of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry. “There is a risk, and I think we’re seeing it in Australia today, that a prolonged period of economic growth without recession can lead to complacency both among policymakers and the electorate.”
But that brings us back to the slowing housing market, and the general sense of pessimism that sneaks into conversations about the economy in Australia, especially among the young.
Maybe the real reason Australia has made it so long without a downturn is an absence of complacency. No one is brimming with overconfidence that all is well and always will be.
“What has happened in the last 27 years is a series of shocks, each of which, thanks to policy and luck, we were able to overcome,” said Stephen Grenville, the former deputy governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia and now a fellow at the Lowy Institute. “That’s the nature of the economy we’re in now — an economy with shocks plus flexibility.”
It isn’t the absence of bad stuff happening in the economy that has kept Australia growing for so long. It is the nation’s economic flexibility and policymakers’ rejection of complacency.
So maybe the pessimism isn’t a paradox at all. And maybe we would be more worried about Australia’s economic future if house prices had kept soaring toward unsustainable highs, or if young people had made economic decisions with a sense of reckless invincibility and engaged in borrowing and spending behaviors accordingly.
The Australian experience is evidence that the “business cycle” is a misleading way to think about economic growth. Recessions aren’t like thunderstorms, an inevitable, random event that may be violent but provide much-needed water to crops.
Maybe recessions are more like car crashes. They may never be completely eliminated, but making the right choices can make them rarer and less damaging when they do happen.
In trying to learn the lessons of Australia, that may be the biggest of them all. There will always be bad things that happen in an economy. The best way to keep them from causing the mass pain that accompanies a recession is to combine sound policy, a flexible and dynamic economy and — perhaps most important — just the right amount of fear."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Economic Scene

* Send any friend a storyAs a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.,

The Gadsden Green Housing Complex in Charleston, S.C. The income of the typical American household increased 5.2 percent In 2015, the first real increase since 2007, the United States Census Bureau said Tuesday.

Travis Dove for The New York Times

Working families finally got a raise.

Early on Tuesday, the Census Bureau provided some long-awaited good news for the beleaguered working class: The income of the typical American household perched on the middle rung of the income ladder increased a hearty 5.2 percent In 2015, the first real increase since 2007, the year before the economy sank into recession.

Households all the way down the income scale made more money last year. The average incomes of the poorest fifth of the population increased 6.6 percent after three consecutive years of decline. And the official poverty rate declined to 13.5 percent from 14.8 percent in 2014, the sharpest decline since the late 1960s.

The numbers are heartening, confirming that the sluggish yet consistent recovery of the American economy has finally begun to lift all boats. They fit the story coming from the job market, which is about as tight as it has been in a very long time. They follow rises in the minimum wage across many states and municipalities.

“This shows the importance of robust labor markets,” said Jared Bernstein, a former top economic adviser to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. “If working-age Americans are going to get ahead, it is through a paycheck.”

And yet this positive news — while clearly undermining Donald J. Trump’s unbridled pessimism about the American economy — does not justify unbridled celebration, either.

“The next question is why did it take such a long time for things to look good?” said Arloc Sherman of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a left-leaning policy analysis group. As Sheldon H. Danziger of the Russell Sage Foundation put it, it’s great news that men’s earnings from work increased 1.5 percent. But they are still lower than in the 1970s.

The answer does not just involve sluggish growth. It is also about its distribution. Gains may be finally trickling down to those at the bottom of the ladder. But the numbers still offer a lopsided picture, with a gargantuan share of income rising to the top. While the bottom fifth of households increased their share of the nation’s income, by the census’s definition, to 3.4 percent from 3.3 percent, the richest 5 percent kept 21.8 percent of the pie, the same as in 2014.

“There’s an inequality problem,” Mr. Sherman added.

Against the backdrop of the last few decades, the income gains revealed on Tuesday underscore how difficult the American economy has made it for average workers to get ahead. In nearly every successive economic cycle, progress came slower and harder than in the previous one.

The data, which measured how Americans were doing six years into the economic recovery, show that incomes in the middle, measured in 2015 dollars, were still 1.6 percent below the previous peak of $57,423 a household, which was attained in 2007, just before the economy sank into what has come to be known as the Great Recession.

How does that look compared to the nation’s recent history? After the economy slipped into recession in 1969, it took only three years for incomes in the middle to rebound and surpass their previous peak. After the downturn of 1973, it took five; after back-to-back recessions in 1981 and 1982, it took seven.

And, except for the long expansion that ran from 1991 through 2000, it has been getting worse. The economic growth from late 2001 to about the end of 2007 never even managed to deliver incomes above the previous peak for the typical household, reached near the end of Bill Clinton’s presidency. The expansion underway today may not get there, either.

Today, median household incomes are still 2.4 percent below the absolute peak they hit in 1999 — when Facebook had yet to come into existence, the big news in the music business was Napster, and the good times in Silicon Valley were about to come crashing down with the collapse of the dot-com bubble.

At the bottom of the ladder, households at the 10th percentile — those poorer than 90 percent of the population — are still a bit poorer than they were in 1989. Americans have managed to develop an internet economy, invent social media and build driverless cars since then, but not to improve the lot of those at the bottom.

What’s more, changes starting in 2013 in the way the census asks people about their incomes can distort comparisons with previous years. After adjusting the data for these changes, according to Elise Gould of the Economic Policy Institute, the income of American households in the middle of the distribution last year was still 4.6 percent below its level in 2007 and 5.4 percent below where it was in 1999.

Men’s earnings from work increased 1.5 percent, according to the United States Census Bureau, but their incomes are still lower than in the 1970s.

Spencer Platt/Getty Images

Of course, the Census Bureau’s numbers on income and poverty don’t add up to a perfect representation of families’ means. For one thing, they include only “money income” — excluding in-kind government benefits like housing vouchers or food stamps. They don’t include the impact of taxes, ignoring the earned-income tax credit, which provides substantial help to families with low earnings.

The official poverty line, moreover, is assessed using a basket of necessities defined in the 1960s — which has little to do with people’s lives today. Over the last few years the census has also published an alternative Supplemental Poverty Measure — which keeps a better tab on Americans’ income and expenditures. Using that count, poverty dipped to 14.3 percent, the lowest level since the census began compiling it in 2009.

Analysts like Scott Winship of the right-leaning Manhattan Institute have argued for some time that long-term income numbers, like those published by the Congressional Budget Office, suggest that Americans in the middle of the income distribution and below have not done badly over recent decades. He concludes that the best strategy to promote the welfare of working Americans is to focus on improving overall economic growth. The fixation with inequality and income distribution, he says, will produce bad policy.

The current census data does suggest that growth can ultimately bring prosperity to average Americans. Still, it also points to the persistence of wide inequality as being at the center of the story.

Across the entire bottom 60 percent of the distribution, households are taking home a smaller slice of the pie than they did in the 1960s and 1970s. The 3.4 percent of income that households in the bottom fifth took home last year was less than the 5.8 percent they had in 1974. With their share shrinking with almost every economic cycle, it is hardly a surprise that it takes longer for them to experience any income gains at all. Growth, alone, is not adding to their prosperity as it once did.

By contrast, households in the top 5 percent have profited nicely from America’s expansions. In 2015, they took in $350,870, on average. That is 4.9 percent more than in 1999 and 37.5 percent more than in 1989.

Historical precedent suggests the latest economic expansion is getting long in the tooth. Lawrence Summers, Treasury secretary under Bill Clinton and a top economic adviser in President Obama’s first term, says there are better than even odds today that the United States will tip into a recession within three years. In July, Deutsche Bank said the probability of a recession within the next 12 months had jumped to 60 percent, the highest since August 2008. JPMorgan thinks the odds are 37 percent.

For all but Americans at the very top, that means that the punch bowl may well be taken away again before the party really gets going. That is not how a well-functioning economy should work."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "ProPublica is a nonprofit newsroom that investigates abuses of power. The Secret IRS Files is an ongoing reporting project. Sign up to be notified when the next installment publishes.
In 2007, Jeff Bezos, then a multibillionaire and now the world’s richest man, did not pay a penny in federal income taxes. He achieved the feat again in 2011. In 2018, Tesla founder Elon Musk, the second-richest person in the world, also paid no federal income taxes.
Michael Bloomberg managed to do the same in recent years. Billionaire investor Carl Icahn did it twice. George Soros paid no federal income tax three years in a row.
ProPublica has obtained a vast trove of Internal Revenue Service data on the tax returns of thousands of the nation’s wealthiest people, covering more than 15 years. The data provides an unprecedented look inside the financial lives of America’s titans, including Warren Buffett, Bill Gates, Rupert Murdoch and Mark Zuckerberg. It shows not just their income and taxes, but also their investments, stock trades, gambling winnings and even the results of audits.
Taken together, it demolishes the cornerstone myth of the American tax system: that everyone pays their fair share and the richest Americans pay the most. The IRS records show that the wealthiest can — perfectly legally — pay income taxes that are only a tiny fraction of the hundreds of millions, if not billions, their fortunes grow each year.
Many Americans live paycheck to paycheck, amassing little wealth and paying the federal government a percentage of their income that rises if they earn more. In recent years, the median American household earned about $70,000 annually and paid 14% in federal taxes. The highest income tax rate, 37%, kicked in this year, for couples, on earnings above $628,300.
The confidential tax records obtained by ProPublica show that the ultrarich effectively sidestep this system.
America’s billionaires avail themselves of tax-avoidance strategies beyond the reach of ordinary people. Their wealth derives from the skyrocketing value of their assets, like stock and property. Those gains are not defined by U.S. laws as taxable income unless and until the billionaires sell.
To capture the financial reality of the richest Americans, ProPublica undertook an analysis that has never been done before. We compared how much in taxes the 25 richest Americans paid each year to how much Forbes estimated their wealth grew in that same time period.
We’re going to call this their true tax rate.
The results are stark. According to Forbes, those 25 people saw their worth rise a collective $401 billion From 2014 to 2018. They paid a total of $13.6 billion in federal income taxes in those five years, the IRS data shows. That’s a staggering sum, but it amounts to a true tax rate of only 3.4%.
It’s a completely different picture for middle-class Americans, for example, wage earners in their early 40s who have amassed a typical amount of wealth for people their age. From 2014 to 2018, such households saw their net worth expand by about $65,000 after taxes on average, mostly due to the rise in value of their homes. But because the vast bulk of their earnings were salaries, their tax bills were almost as much, nearly $62,000, over that five-year period.
No one among the 25 wealthiest avoided as much tax as Buffett, the grandfatherly centibillionaire. That’s perhaps surprising, given his public stance as an advocate of higher taxes for the rich. According to Forbes, his riches rose $24.3 billion Between 2014 and 2018. Over those years, the data shows, Buffett reported paying $23.7 million in taxes.
That works out to a true tax rate of 0.1%, or less than 10 cents for every $100 he added to his wealth.
In the coming months, ProPublica will use the IRS data we have obtained to explore in detail how the ultrawealthy avoid taxes, exploit loopholes and escape scrutiny from federal auditors.
Experts have long understood the broad outlines of how little the wealthy are taxed in the United States, and many lay people have long suspected the same thing.
But few specifics about individuals ever emerge in public. Tax information is among the most zealously guarded secrets in the federal government. ProPublica has decided to reveal individual tax information of some of the wealthiest Americans because it is only by seeing specifics that the public can understand the realities of the country’s tax system.
Consider Bezos’ 2007, one of the years he paid zero in federal income taxes. Amazon’s stock more than doubled. Bezos’ fortune leapt $3.8 billion, according to Forbes, whose wealth estimates are widely cited. How did a person enjoying that sort of wealth explosion end up paying no income tax?
In that year, Bezos, who filed his taxes jointly with his then-wife, MacKenzie Scott, reported a paltry (for him) $46 million in income, largely from interest and dividend payments on outside investments. He was able to offset every penny he earned with losses from side investments and various deductions, like interest expenses on debts and the vague catchall category of “other expenses.”
In 2011, a year in which his wealth held roughly steady at $18 billion, Bezos filed a tax return reporting he lost money — his income that year was more than offset by investment losses. What’s more, because, according to the tax law, he made so little, he even claimed and received a $4,000 tax credit for his children.
His tax avoidance is even more striking if you examine 2006 to 2018, a period for which ProPublica has complete data. Bezos’ wealth increased by $127 billion, according to Forbes, but he reported a total of $6.5 billion in income. The $1.4 billion he paid in personal federal taxes is a massive number — yet it amounts to a 1.1% true tax rate on the rise in his fortune.
So how do megabillionaires pay their megabills while opting for $1 salaries and hanging onto their stock? According to public documents and experts, the answer for some is borrowing money — lots of it.
For regular people, borrowing money is often something done out of necessity, say for a car or a home. But for the ultrawealthy, it can be a way to access billions without producing income, and thus, income tax.
The tax math provides a clear incentive for this. If you own a company and take a huge salary, you’ll pay 37% in income tax on the bulk of it. Sell stock and you’ll pay 20% in capital gains tax — and lose some control over your company. But take out a loan, and these days you’ll pay a single-digit interest rate and no tax; since loans must be paid back, the IRS doesn’t consider them income. Banks typically require collateral, but the wealthy have plenty of that.
The vast majority of the ultrawealthy’s loans do not appear in the tax records obtained by ProPublica since they are generally not disclosed to the IRS. But occasionally, the loans are disclosed in securities filings. In 2014, for example, Oracle revealed that its CEO, Ellison, had a credit line secured by about $10 billion of his shares.
Last year Tesla reported that Musk had pledged some 92 million shares, which were worth about $57.7 billion as of May 29, 2021, as collateral for personal loans.
With the exception of one year when he exercised more than a billion dollars in stock options, Musk’s tax bills in no way reflect the fortune he has at his disposal. In 2015, he paid $68,000 in federal income tax. In 2017, it was $65,000, and in 2018 he paid no federal income tax. Between 2014 and 2018, he had a true tax rate of 3.27%.
The IRS records provide glimpses of other massive loans. In both 2016 and 2017, investor Carl Icahn, who ranks as the 40th-wealthiest American on the Forbes list, paid no federal income taxes despite reporting a total of $544 million in adjusted gross income (which the IRS defines as earnings minus items like student loan interest payments or alimony). Icahn had an outstanding loan of $1.2 billion with Bank of America among other loans, according to the IRS data. It was technically a mortgage because it was secured, at least in part, by Manhattan penthouse apartments and other properties.
Borrowing offers multiple benefits to Icahn: He gets huge tranches of cash to turbocharge his investment returns. Then he gets to deduct the interest from his taxes. In an interview, Icahn explained that he reports the profits and losses of his business empire on his personal taxes.
Icahn acknowledged that he is a “big borrower. I do borrow a lot of money.” Asked if he takes out loans also to lower his tax bill, Icahn said: “No, not at all. My borrowing is to win. I enjoy the competition. I enjoy winning.”
He said adjusted gross income was a misleading figure for him. After taking hundreds of millions in deductions for the interest on his loans, he registered tax losses for both years, he said. “I didn’t make money because, unfortunately for me, my interest was higher than my whole adjusted income.”
Asked whether it was appropriate that he had paid no income tax in certain years, Icahn said he was perplexed by the question. “There’s a reason it’s called income tax,” he said. “The reason is if, if you’re a poor person, a rich person, if you are Apple — if you have no income, you don’t pay taxes.” He added: “Do you think a rich person should pay taxes no matter what? I don’t think it’s germane. How can you ask me that question?”
Skeptics might question our analysis of how little the superrich pay in taxes. For one, they might argue that owners of companies get hit by corporate taxes. They also might counter that some billionaires cannot avoid income — and therefore taxes. And after death, the common understanding goes, there’s a final no-escape clause: the estate tax, which imposes a steep tax rate on sums over $11.7 million.
ProPublica found that none of these factors alter the fundamental picture.
Take corporate taxes. When companies pay them, economists say, these costs are passed on to the companies’ owners, workers or even consumers. Models differ, but they generally assume big stockholders shoulder the lion’s share.
Corporate taxes, however, have plummeted in recent decades in what has become a golden age of corporate tax avoidance. By sending profits abroad, companies like Google, Facebook, Microsoft and Apple have often paid little or no U.S. corporate tax.
For some of the nation’s wealthiest people, particularly Bezos and Musk, adding corporate taxes to the equation would hardly change anything at all. Other companies like Berkshire Hathaway and Walmart do pay more, which means that for people like Buffett and the Waltons, corporate tax could add significantly to their burden.
It is also true that some billionaires don’t avoid taxes by avoiding incomes. In 2018, nine of the 25 wealthiest Americans reported more than $500 million in income and three more than $1 billion.
In such cases, though, the data obtained by ProPublica shows billionaires have a palette of tax-avoidance options to offset their gains using credits, deductions (which can include charitable donations) or losses to lower or even zero out their tax bills. Some own sports teams that offer such lucrative write-offs that owners often end up paying far lower tax rates than their millionaire players. Others own commercial buildings that steadily rise in value but nevertheless can be used to throw off paper losses that offset income.
Michael Bloomberg, the 13th-richest American on the Forbes list, often reports high income because the profits of the private company he controls flow mainly to him.
In 2018, he reported income of $1.9 billion. When it came to his taxes, Bloomberg managed to slash his bill by using deductions made possible by tax cuts passed during the Trump administration, charitable donations of $968.3 million and credits for having paid foreign taxes. The end result was that he paid $70.7 million in income tax on that almost $2 billion in income. That amounts to just a 3.7% conventional income tax rate. Between 2014 and 2018, Bloomberg had a true tax rate of 1.30%.
In a statement, a spokesman for Bloomberg noted that as a candidate, Bloomberg had advocated for a variety of tax hikes on the wealthy. “Mike Bloomberg pays the maximum tax rate on all federal, state, local and international taxable income as prescribed by law,” the spokesman wrote. And he cited Bloomberg’s philanthropic giving, offering the calculation that “taken together, what Mike gives to charity and pays in taxes amounts to approximately 75% of his annual income.”
The statement also noted: “The release of a private citizen’s tax returns should raise real privacy concerns regardless of political affiliation or views on tax policy. In the United States no private citizen should fear the illegal release of their taxes. We intend to use all legal means at our disposal to determine which individual or government entity leaked these and ensure that they are held responsible.”
Ultimately, after decades of wealth accumulation, the estate tax is supposed to serve as a backstop, allowing authorities an opportunity to finally take a piece of giant fortunes before they pass to a new generation. But in reality, preparing for death is more like the last stage of tax avoidance for the ultrawealthy.
University of Southern California tax law professor Edward McCaffery has summarized the entire arc with the catchphrase “buy, borrow, die.”
The notion of dying as a tax benefit seems paradoxical. Normally when someone sells an asset, even a minute before they die, they owe 20% capital gains tax. But at death, that changes. Any capital gains till that moment are not taxed. This allows the ultrarich and their heirs to avoid paying billions in taxes. The “step-up in basis” is widely recognized by experts across the political spectrum as a flaw in the code.
Then comes the estate tax, which, at 40%, is among the highest in the federal code. This tax is supposed to give the government one last chance to get a piece of all those unrealized gains and other assets the wealthiest Americans accumulate over their lifetimes.
It’s clear, though, from aggregate IRS data, tax research and what little trickles into the public arena about estate planning of the wealthy that they can readily escape turning over almost half of the value of their estates. Many of the richest create foundations for philanthropic giving, which provide large charitable tax deductions during their lifetimes and bypass the estate tax when they die.
Wealth managers offer clients a range of opaque and complicated trusts that allow the wealthiest Americans to give large sums to their heirs without paying estate taxes. The IRS data obtained by ProPublica gives some insight into the ultrawealthy’s estate planning, showing hundreds of these trusts.
The result is that large fortunes can pass largely intact from one generation to the next. Of the 25 richest people in America today, about a quarter are heirs: three are Waltons, two are scions of the Mars candy fortune and one is the son of Estée Lauder.
In the past year and a half, hundreds of thousands of Americans have died from COVID-19, while millions were thrown out of work. But one of the bleakest periods in American history turned out to be one of the most lucrative for billionaires. They added $1.2 trillion to their fortunes from January 2020 to the end of April of this year, according to Forbes.
That windfall is among the many factors that have led the country to an inflection point, one that traces back to a half-century of growing wealth inequality and the financial crisis of 2008, which left many with lasting economic damage. American history is rich with such turns. There have been famous acts of tax resistance, like the Boston Tea Party, countered by less well-known efforts to have the rich pay more.
One such incident, over half a century ago, appeared as if it might spark great change. President Lyndon Johnson’s outgoing treasury secretary, Joseph Barr, shocked the nation when he revealed that 155 Americans making over $200,000 (about $1.6 million today) had paid no taxes. That group, he told the Senate, included 21 millionaires.
“We face now the possibility of a taxpayer revolt if we do not soon make major reforms in our income taxes,” Barr said. Members of Congress received more furious letters about the tax scofflaws that year than they did about the Vietnam War.
Congress did pass some reforms, but the long-term trend was a revolt in the opposite direction, which then accelerated with the election of Ronald Reagan in 1980. Since then, through a combination of political donations, lobbying, charitable giving and even direct bids for political office, the ultrawealthy have helped shape the debate about taxation in their favor.
One apparent exception: Buffett, who broke ranks with his billionaire cohort to call for higher taxes on the rich. In a famous New York Times op-ed In 2011, Buffett wrote, “My friends and I have been coddled long enough by a billionaire-friendly Congress. It’s time for our government to get serious about shared sacrifice.”
Buffett did something in that article that few Americans do: He publicly revealed how much he had paid in personal federal taxes the previous year ($6.9 million). Separately, Forbes estimated his fortune had risen $3 billion that year. Using that information, an observer could have calculated his true tax rate; it was 0.2%. But then, as now, the discussion that ensued on taxes was centered on the traditional income tax rate.
In 2011, President Barack Obama proposed legislation, known as the Buffett Rule. It would have raised income tax rates on people reporting over a million dollars a year. It didn’t pass. Even if it had, however, the Buffett Rule wouldn’t have raised Buffett’s taxes significantly. If you can avoid income, you can avoid taxes.
Today, just a few years after Republicans passed a massive tax cut that disproportionately benefited the wealthy, the country may be facing another swing of the pendulum, back toward a popular demand to raise taxes on the wealthy. In the face of growing inequality and with spending ambitions that rival those of Franklin D. Roosevelt or Johnson, the Biden administration has proposed a slate of changes. These include raising the tax rates on people making over $400,000 and bumping the top income tax rate from 37% to 39.6%, with a top rate for long-term capital gains to match that. The administration also wants to up the corporate tax rate and to increase the IRS’ budget.
Some Democrats have gone further, floating ideas that challenge the tax structure as it’s existed for the last century. Oregon Sen. Ron Wyden, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, has proposed taxing unrealized capital gains, a shot through the heart of Macomber. Sens. Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders have proposed wealth taxes.
Aggressive new laws would likely inspire new, sophisticated avoidance techniques. A few countries, including Switzerland and Spain, have wealth taxes on a small scale. Several, most recently France, have abandoned them as unworkable. Opponents contend that they are complicated to administer, as it is hard to value assets, particularly of private companies and property.
What it would take for a fundamental overhaul of the U.S. tax system is not clear. But the IRS data obtained by ProPublica illuminates that all of these conversations have been taking place in a vacuum. Neither political leaders nor the public have ever had an accurate picture of how comprehensively the wealthiest Americans avoid paying taxes.
Buffett and his fellow billionaires have known this secret for a long time. As Buffett put it in 2011: “There’s been class warfare going on for the last 20 years, and my class has won.”"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Advertisement
Supported by
Wealthiest Executives Paid Little to Nothing in Federal Income Taxes, Report Says
An analysis by ProPublica based on I.R.S. documents showed billionaires like Jeff Bezos and Elon Musk benefited from tax code loopholes and a focus on taxing income over wealth.
WASHINGTON — the 25 richest Americans, including Jeff Bezos, Michael Bloomberg and Elon Musk, paid relatively little — and sometimes nothing — in federal income taxes between 2014 and 2018, according to an analysis from the news organization ProPublica that was based on a trove of Internal Revenue Service tax data.
The analysis showed that the nation’s richest executives paid just a fraction of their wealth in taxes — $13.6 billion in federal income taxes during a time period when their collective net worth increased by $401 billion, according to a tabulation by Forbes.
The documents reveal the stark inequity in the American tax system, as plutocrats like Mr. Bezos, Mr. Bloomberg, Warren Buffett, Mr. Musk and George Soros were able to benefit from a complex web of loopholes in the tax code and the fact that the United States puts its emphasis on taxing labor income versus wealth. Much of the wealth that the rich accrue — like shares in companies they run, vacation homes, yachts and other investments — isn’t considered “taxable income” unless those assets are sold and a gain is realized. Even then, there are loopholes in the tax code that can limit or erase all tax liability.
Administration officials said on Tuesday that federal authorities were investigating the disclosure of private tax information, which can constitute a criminal offense.
“Any unauthorized disclosure of confidential information by a person with access is illegal,” Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, said at a briefing. “We take this very seriously.”
The rare window into the tactics of the nation’s top billionaires comes as President Biden is trying to overhaul the tax code so that corporations and the rich pay more. Mr. Biden has proposed raising the top marginal income tax rate to 39.6 percent from 37 percent, which would reverse the reduction ushered in by former President Donald J. Trump’s 2017 tax cuts.
The documents and the conclusions of the analysis could renew calls for Mr. Biden to consider a wealth tax, given that a higher marginal tax rate would do little to raise the tax bills of the 25 richest Americans. from 2014 to 2018, the 25 wealthiest Americans paid an average of 15.8 percent, or $13.6 billion, in personal federal income taxes.
Chuck Marr, senior director of federal tax policy at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, said the private tax data highlighted the relatively modest approach that Mr. Biden is proposing considering the extent to which the tax code rewards wealth and punishes labor.
“Some of the solutions are often cast as aggressive,” Mr. Marr said. “What’s really radical is the current circumstance.”
Lawmakers like Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, have championed the idea of placing a 2 percent tax on an individual’s net worth above $50 million — including the value of stocks, houses, boats and anything else a person owns, after subtracting any debts. In an interview on Tuesday, Ms. Warren called the tax revelations “deeply shocking” and said it reinforced the fact that lawmakers should be thinking about wealth over income when writing tax policy.
“Increasing the personal income tax rate by 2 percent or 10 percent is not going to make any real difference to these multibillionaires,” Ms. Warren said. “The real action in America is on wealth, not income.”
Although she praised some of Mr. Biden’s proposals such as increasing taxes on capital gains and targeting “real” corporate profits, Ms. Warren said that she would like to see the White House be more ambitious.
“I want to see the Biden administration push harder on the wealth taxes,” Ms. Warren said.
Mr. Biden and his advisers have generally deemed the idea of a wealth tax unworkable but they have not formally closed the door on the idea. Instead, the president wants an extra $80 billion over a 10-year period to beef up the Internal Revenue Service so it is better equipped to go after tax cheats. And he has proposed doubling the tax on capital gains — the proceeds of selling an asset like a stock or a boat — for people earning more than $1 million.
“We know that there is more to be done to ensure that corporations, individuals who are at the highest income, are paying more of their fair share,” Ms. Psaki said.
At a New York Times DealBook event in February, Treasury Secretary Janet L. Yellen said that a wealth tax is “something that has very difficult implementation problems.” She suggested that other tax changes that would increase taxes on wealth that is transferred at death could have a similar effect. In March, however, Ms. Yellen suggested that she remained open minded about a wealth tax.
“Well, that’s something that we haven’t decided yet,” Ms. Yellen said on ABC News, before pointing to other tax ideas that would also affect the rich.
ProPublica did not reveal how it obtained the information and it could not be independently verified by The New York Times. But the publication said the documents were provided to the outlet “in raw form, with no conditions or conclusions” and that it had run the information past every executive whose information was included in the article.
“Every person whose tax information is described in this story was asked to comment,” ProPublica said, adding that those who responded “all said they had paid the taxes they owed.”
In a separate article, the outlet said it was publishing the information “quite selectively and carefully — because we believe it serves the public interest in fundamental ways, allowing readers to see patterns that were until now hidden.”
The report highlights the techniques that the wealthy often use to reduce their tax bills, including taking advantage of a complex web of loopholes and deductions that are perfectly legal and can significantly minimize tax liability. That includes borrowing huge sums of money backed by enormous stock holdings. Loans are not taxed and the interest that the executives pay on the borrowed money can often be deducted from their tax bills.
In 2007, Mr. Bezos, the chief executive of Amazon, paid nothing in federal income taxes even as his company’s stock price doubled. Four years later, as his wealth swelled to $18 billion, Mr. Bezos reported losses and received a tax credit of $4,000 for his children, according to ProPublica. An Amazon spokesman did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Mr. Buffett, the chief executive of Berkshire Hathaway who has long said publicly that the tax code should hit the rich harder, paid just $23.7 million in taxes from 2014 to 2018, when his wealth rose by $24.3 billion.
In a statement to ProPublica, Mr. Buffett said he expected that 99.5 percent of his wealth would go toward taxes and charity upon his death, adding, “I continue to believe that the tax code should be changed substantially.”
Mr. Soros, the billionaire philanthropist and investor, paid no federal income tax for three consecutive years, according to the report. A spokesman for Mr. Soros told ProPublica that “between 2016 and 2018 George Soros lost money on his investments, therefore he did not owe federal income taxes in those years.”
In 2018, Mr. Bloomberg, who controls the media giant Bloomberg L.P., reported income of $1.9 billion and paid $70.7 million in income tax. According to the report, Mr. Bloomberg was able to reduce his tax bill through deductions, charitable donations and “credits for having paid foreign taxes.”
A spokesman for Mr. Bloomberg, in a statement to ProPublica, said they would “use all legal means at our disposal to determine which individual or government entity leaked these and ensure that they are held responsible.”
The Treasury Department said that the federal government is working to determine how the tax records were released.
“The unauthorized disclosure of confidential government information is illegal,” Lily Adams, a Treasury spokeswoman, said. “The matter is being referred to the Office of the Inspector General, Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration, Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the U.S. attorney’s office for the District of Columbia, all of whom have independent authority to investigate.”
A Department of Justice spokesman referred an inquiry about an investigation to the F.B.I., which referred the matter to the I.R.S.
At a Senate Finance Committee hearing where he was testifying on Tuesday, Charles Rettig, the I.R.S. commissioner, said that he could not comment on the apparent breach at his agency but said that it was being scrutinized.
“I can confirm that there is an investigation with respect to the allegations that the source of the information in that article came from the Internal Revenue Service,” Mr. Rettig said. “The investigators will investigate.”
Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, the chairman of the finance committee, told Mr. Rettig that he was concerned about the security of taxpayer data. He also emphasized that the disclosures made clear that the tax code needed to be rewritten.
“What this data reveals is that the country’s wealthiest, who profited immensely during the pandemic, have not been paying their fair share,” Mr. Wyden said, adding that he has proposals to fix that disparity.
After the hearing, Mr. Wyden declined to offer specifics about his plan to address the issue, but emphasized his concern about unfairness in the tax code.
“The people I represent are doing work, like treating Covid patients, they’re paying taxes with every paycheck,” Mr. Wyden said. “The country’s wealthiest, including during the pandemic, profited handsomely and then do not pay their fair share because they have figured out with good lawyers and accountants how to defer and delay and postpone and almost do it in perpetuity.”
Some Republicans played down the idea that the wealthy don’t pay enough in taxes and instead used the disclosures to raise questions about the trustworthiness of the I.R.S.
Senator Patrick J. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania, said on Tuesday that while it was problematic if some of the wealthiest Americans paid no income taxes, he thought that top earners were paying their fair share overall. He pointed to data that shows the top 10 percent of American earners make about half of all the income earned in America and pay 70 percent of all the income taxes.
“There’s this mythology that high-income people don’t pay any taxes,” Mr. Toomey said on a telephone town hall. “Are there individual exceptions? I’m sure there are. We should see if there are loopholes that are perpetuating that, but we have a very, very progressive tax code.”
Senator Mike Crapo of Idaho, the top Republican on the committee, said that the disclosures added to his concern about a Biden administration proposal to give the I.R.S. more access to the financial information of taxpayers. He suggested that the agency could not be trusted to keep the data secure.
Emily Cochrane Jeanna Smialek and Karen Weise contributed reporting.
Advertisement"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Economic Headwinds Mount as Leaders Weigh Costs of Confronting Russia
Alan Rappeport and
BRUSSELS — The world economy is heading into a potentially grim period as rising costs, shortages of food and other commodities and Russia’s continuing invasion of Ukraine threaten to slow economic growth and bring about a painful global slump.
Two years after the coronavirus pandemic emerged and left much of the globe in a state of paralysis, policymakers are grappling with ongoing challenges, including clogged supply chains, lockdowns in China and the prospect of an energy crisis as nations wean themselves off Russian oil and gas. Those colliding forces have some economists starting to worry about a global recession as different corners of the world find their economies battered by events.
Finding ways to avoid a slowdown while continuing to exert pressure on Russia for its war in Ukraine will be the primary focus of finance ministers from the Group of 7 nations who are convening in Bonn, Germany, this week.
At a news conference on Wednesday, Treasury Secretary Janet L. Yellen said that elevated food and energy prices were depressing both spending and economic output, creating what she called “stagflationary effects” all around the world.
“This is an environment that is filled with risks, both with respect to inflation, and also potential slowdowns,” Ms. Yellen said.
The economic challenges that governments around the globe are facing could begin to chip away at the united front that Western nations have maintained in confronting Russia’s aggression, including sweeping sanctions aimed at crippling its economy and efforts to reduce reliance on Russian energy.
Policymakers are balancing delicate trade-offs as they consider how to isolate Russia, support Ukraine and keep their own economies afloat at a moment when prices are rising rapidly and growth is slowing.
Central banks around the world are beginning to raise interest rates to help tame rapid inflation, moves that will temper economic growth by raising borrowing costs and could lead to higher unemployment. Christine Lagarde, president of the European Central Bank, last week signaled a possible increase in interest rates in July, which would be the ECB’s first such move in more than a decade.
Global growth is expected to slow to 3.6 percent this year, the International Monetary Fund projected in April, down from the 4.4 percent it forecast before both Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and China’s zero-Covid lockdowns.
On Monday, the European Commission released its own revised economic forecast, showing a slowdown in growth to 2.7 percent this year from the 4 percent estimated in its winter report. At the same time, inflation is hitting record levels and is expected to average 6.8 percent for the year. Britain’s annual inflation rate jumped to 9 percent last month, the highest in 40 years, the Office for National Statistics said on Wednesday. And some Eastern European countries face even steeper price increases, with Poland, Estonia, the Czech Republic, Bulgaria and Lithuania all facing inflation rates in excess of 11 percent.
Pressures on global supply chains also worsened in April as the Russian invasion of Ukraine and pandemic lockdowns in China made it more difficult for companies to source parts and products globally, a supply chain index published Wednesday by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York showed. That could further exacerbate shortages and price increases.
Eswar Prasad, the former head of the International Monetary Fund’s China division, summed up the challenges facing the G7 nations, saying that its “policymakers are caught in the bind that any tightening of screws on Russia by limiting energy purchases worsens inflation and hurts growth in their economies.”
“Such sanctions, for all the moral justification underpinning them, are exacting an increasingly heavy economic toll that in turn could have domestic political consequences for G7 leaders,” he added.
Still, the United States is expected to press its allies to continue isolating Russia and to deliver more economic aid to Ukraine despite their own economic troubles. Officials are also expected to discuss the merits of imposing tariffs on Russian energy exports ahead of a proposed European oil embargo that the United States fears could send prices skyrocketing by limiting supplies. Policymakers will also discuss whether to press countries such as India to roll back export restrictions on crucial food products that are worsening already high prices.
Against this backdrop is the growing urgency to help sustain Ukraine’s economy, which the International Monetary Fund has said needs an estimated $5 billion a month in aid to keep government operations running. The U.S. Congress is close to passing a $40 billion aid package for Ukraine that will cover some of these costs, but Ms. Yellen has called on her European counterparts to provide more financial help.
Finance ministers are expected to consider other measures for providing Ukraine with relief.
There is increasing interest in the idea of seizing some of the approximately $300 billion in Russian central bank reserves that the United States and its allies have immobilized and using that money to help fund Ukraine’s reconstruction. Treasury Department officials are considering the idea, but they have trepidations about the feasibility of such a move and the possibility that it would raise doubts about the United States as a safe place to store assets.
On Wednesday, Ms. Yellen dismissed the likelihood of such a move when she said liquidating Russian assets is “not something that is legally permissible in the United States.”
Ahead of the G7 meeting this week, American officials saw the economic challenges facing Europe firsthand. During a stop to meet with top officials in Warsaw on Monday, Ms. Yellen acknowledged the toll that the conflict in Ukraine is having on the economy of Poland, where officials have raised interest rates sharply to combat inflation. Poland has absorbed more than three million Ukrainian refugees and has faced a cutoff in gas exports from Russia.
“They have to deal with a tighter monetary policy just as countries around the world and the United States are,” Ms. Yellen told reporters. “At a time when Poland is committed to large expenditures to shore up its security, it is a difficult balancing act.”
A downturn may be unavoidable in some countries, and economists are weighing multiple factors as they gauge the likelihood of a recession, including a severe slowdown in China related to continuing Covid lockdowns.
The European Commission, in its economic report, said the E.U. “is first in line among advanced economies to take a hit,” because of its proximity to Ukraine and its dependence on Russian energy. At the same time, it has absorbed more than five million refugees in less than three months.
Deutsche Bank analysts said this week that they thought a recession in Europe was unlikely. By contrast, Carl B. Weinberg, chief economist at High Frequency Economics, warned in a note on Monday that with consumer demand and output falling, “Germany’s economy is headed for recession.” Analysts at Capital Economics predicted that Germany, Italy and Britain are likely to face recessions, meaning there is a “reasonable chance” that the broader eurozone will also face one, defined as two consecutive quarters of falling output.
Vicky Redwood, senior economic adviser at Capital Economics, warned that more aggressive interest rate increases by central banks could lead to a global contraction.
“If inflation expectations and inflation prove more stubborn than we expect, and interest rates need to rise further as a result, then a recession most probably will be on the cards,” Ms. Redwood wrote in a note to clients this week.
The major culprit is energy prices. In Germany, which has been most dependent on Russian fuel among the major economies in Europe, the squeeze is being acutely felt by its industrial-heavy business sector as well as consumers.
Russia-Ukraine War: Key Developments
In Mariupol. The bloodiest battle of the war in Ukraine ended in Mariupol, as the Ukrainian military ordered fighters holed up at a steel plant in the city to surrender. Russia said that nearly 1,000 Ukrainian fighters are in Kremlin custody, though their fate remains uncertain.
Russian gas shipments “underpin the competitiveness of our industry,” Martin Brudermüller, the chief executive of the chemical giant BASF, said at the company’s annual general meeting last month.
While calling to decrease its dependence, Mr. Brudermüller nevertheless warned that “if the natural gas supply from Russia were to suddenly stop, it would cause irreversible economic damage” and possibly force a stop in production.
The fallout from a gas embargo has been the subject of spirited debate among German economists and policymakers, with analyses ranging from manageable to catastrophic. The flow of energy is just one of several supply concerns in the industrial sector.
Rising food prices are another matter causing anxiety among finance ministers. The Treasury Department released a report on Wednesday laying out plans by the World Bank and other international financial institutions to combat food shortages.
The interruption of wheat exports from Ukraine and Russia, which together account for 28 percent of global exports, along with supply chain disruptions, a severe drought in India that has caused it to ban shipments of grain and Covid-related lockdowns in China, are also causing food prices to spiral and increasing global hunger, particularly in Africa and the Middle East.
The question for both American and European policymakers is how to corral leaping prices without sending their economies into recession. The Federal Reserve has begun raising interest rates to tame inflation in the United States, and its chair, Jerome H. Powell, has acknowledged that bringing prices down without seriously hurting the overall economy will be a challenge. Ms. Yellen suggested on Wednesday that the United States was well placed to withstand the turbulence, pointing to America’s strong labor market and healthy household finances. She predicted that the United States would not fall into a recession but that Europe could be a different matter.
“I think Europe is perhaps a bit more a bit more vulnerable, and of course, more exposed on the energy front than the United States,” she said.
That conundrum accounts for the reluctance of the European Central Bank to raise rates. In the plus column, the European Commission noted that unemployment in the eurozone was down, as were government deficits, even though war-related costs were rising.
While food prices are increasing around the world, the level of inflation varies widely. Food inflation was 2.5 percent in France and Ireland during the first three months of 2022 and 10 percent in Eastern European countries, while in Turkey and Argentina, it was 60 to 70 percent in March alone, according to an analysis last week from ING.
In a speech to the Brussels Economic Forum on Tuesday, Ms. Yellen made the case that Russia’s actions are a reminder that nations should not trade national security for cheap energy. She argued that it is crucial to reduce reliance on Russia and China and to accelerate investments in renewable resources.
“No country controls the wind and the sun,” Ms. Yellen said. “Let’s make sure that this is the last time that the global economy is held hostage to the hostile actions of those who produce fossil fuels.”
Alan Rappeport reported from Brussels and Bonn, Germany, and Patricia Cohen from London."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "THE TICKER
President Trump’s tariffs threaten to throw his “America First” vision into reverse, prompting manufacturers to ship production and jobs overseas to dodge new trade barriers.
That’s one takeaway from the Institute for Supply Management’s July survey, which tracks sentiment among industry executives. It reveals a rising tide of alarm among manufacturers about the direction of the administration’s trade offensive — even before the White House announced Wednesday that it is considering hiking proposed tariffs on $200 billion of Chinese imports from 10 percent to 25 percent.
“We’re seeing a lot of comments from the respondents about evaluating whether to manufacture something in the U.S. or make it in Canada or make it in Mexico,” Timothy Fiore, chairman of the Institute for Supply Management’s manufacturing survey, said Wednesday, per Bloomberg News. “If the end market is Europe or China … you’re going to want to move it outside the U.S. at this point.”
Ned Hill, an Ohio State University professor who studies manufacturing, tells me he's hearing the same thing. “Companies I talk to are starting to compare their offshore production pricing to their North American production pricing… Their pricing departments are working overtime and exercising spreadsheets quite actively,” he says.
They have yet to make any decisions, pending more clarity about where the trade war is headed, Hill says. But for many, shifting production wouldn’t require major investments. He said the Trump administration may be “missing the Rubik’s cube that a modern, U.S.-headquartered global corporation plays with. The big change since 2000 is putting production platforms near major markets… They can ship into any market in the world from any of their other factories.”
The state of play suggest Harley-Davidson — which in June announced it would move some manufacturing abroad to duck retaliatory European tariffs, drawing a tirade from Trump — may be a harbinger of a wider trend. If more U.S. companies follow the motorcycle maker’s lead, the headlines alone would create a political migraine for a president who campaigned on promises to restore American manufacturing might.
That factory flight is hardly inevitable. The ISM survey showed the manufacturing index in July had slipped to 58.1 percent — it’s the lowest in fourth months, representing a steeper drop than forecasters anticipated. But it remains close to a multiyear high. (Anything above 50 percent indicates companies are expanding.) “The report was not as strong as [last] month’s, but it was still quite strong, despite continued angst about trade policy,” Jim O’Sullivan, chief economist for High Frequency Economics, wrote in a note to clients.
Others said the relative strength in the report represents a lagging indicator, especially if the trade fight continues to escalate. “The ISM index remains at a high level, consistent with decent growth and strong payrolls, but that will change if the relatively small tariffs imposed so far are followed by the $200B-worth of new levies now under consideration by the administration,” Ian Shepherdson, chief economist for Pantheon Macroeconomics, wrote in a research note to clients. “Dumb policy hurts.” And Paul Ashworth of Capital Economics predicted in a note that the manufacturing growth will continue to weaken through the second half of the year.
Detroit automakers, for example, are showing worrying signs. Ford last week reported that it’s second-quarter profit fell almost by half, and it slashed its outlook for the rest of the year, citing in part rising commodity costs from tariffs. General Motors likewise pointed to spiking steel and aluminum prices as it cut its profit forecast for the year. The specter of an uglier trade war is factoring into a decision the company is struggling to make over whether to close a plant in Lordstown, Ohio — and potentially move that production to Mexico.
Manufacturers’ anxiety about the trade war was evident in the feedback they offered ISM. About half mentioned tariffs in their general comments, up from a third when the survey started tracking the issue in March, per Bloomberg. Bespoke Investment Group offers the receipts:
See any pattern? pic.twitter.com/Qd7MvP0ERh— Bespoke (@bespokeinvest) August 1, 2018
The sentiment is also showing up in second-quarter earnings calls. Bespoke reports in a note that halfway through this earnings season, mentions of tariffs by S&P 500 companies that have reported so far have already doubled relative to the entire first quarter.
|You are reading The Finance 202, our must-read tipsheet on where Wall Street meets Washington.|
|Not a regular subscriber?|
| |
— Fed: Expect rate hikes. The Washington Post's Heather Long: “The Federal Reserve left its benchmark interest rate unchanged on Wednesday, keeping the rate in a range of 1.75 percent to 2 percent, but the central bank said the U.S. economy is 'strong' and hinted that more rate hikes are coming soon. [Trump] has urged the Fed to keep rates low, but the central bank is an independent body, and Fed leaders have made it clear they intend to carry out their mandate to keep unemployment down and prices stable without political interference. Fed policymakers think the U.S. economy is on very good footing now and that the historically low rates that were put in place to aid the economy after the Great Recession are no longer necessary. 'The labor market has continued to strengthen and…economic activity has been rising at a strong rate,' the Fed said in its statement Wednesday, adding that it expects 'further gradual increases' in interest rates.”
From Grant Thornton chief economist Diane Swonk:
The most important change to come out of the Fed meeting is the word “strong” used to describe the economy. This represents an upgrade from the word “solid” in June and sets the stage for another rate hike in September.— Diane Swonk (@DianeSwonk) August 1, 2018
Indeed, per WSJ's Nick Timiraos: "In all, the Fed’s rate-setting committee used the word “strong”—or a derivative of it—six times to describe the economy and labor markets."
— Atlanta Fed boosts GDP estimate. CNBC: “Economic growth is expected to continue at a rapid pace in the third quarter, according to a preliminary forecast from the Atlanta Fed. The central bank district estimates that GDP will increase 5 percent for the July-to-September period, according to an update posted Wednesday. If the forecast is accurate, it will come on top of a strong 4.1 percent second quarter that was buoyed by a jump in consumer and business spending. [Trump] boasted Friday that growth would go 'a lot higher' even though many economists, including at the Fed, expect the economy to moderate in 2019 and beyond. The Atlanta Fed's GDP Now forecast, however, has its skeptics. The tracker often starts off optimistic early in the quarter then cools as more data flow in. In the first quarter, the indicator at one point showed 5.4 percent growth in a quarter where GDP rose just 2.2 percent."
— Treasury runs up more red ink. The Wall Street Journal's Josh Zumbrun and Daniel Kruger: “Looming trillion-dollar federal budget deficits are boosting the U.S. Treasury’s borrowing and could restrain a fast-growing economy as the cost of credit also rises. On a day the yield of the 10-year Treasury note climbed above 3% for the first time since June, the Treasury Department announced Wednesday it would boost auctions of U.S. debt by an additional $30 billion over the next three months, in part by adding an additional $1 billion each month to its auctions of two-year, three-year and five-year notes. Over the remainder of the year, the Treasury plans to borrow $329 billion from July through September — up $56 billion from the agency’s April estimate — and $440 billion in October through December. The figures are 63% higher than what the Treasury borrowed during the same six-month period last year.”
— ADP: 219,000 hires in July. Bloomberg News's Sho Chandra: “Companies added the most workers in five months to U.S. payrolls in July, a sign hiring remains strong despite a shrinking pool of qualified workers and headwinds from trade, according to data released Wednesday from the ADP Research Institute in Roseland, New Jersey. ... The results, coming ahead of the monthly jobs report due from the Labor Department on Friday, are a positive sign for private payrolls. Demand for labor increased across a range of industries including professional and business services, health care and social assistance, leisure and hospitality, manufacturing and construction, the ADP report showed.”
TRADE FLY-AROUND:
— Trump eyes major escalation with China. The Post's Damian Paletta: "Trump has instructed his top trade representative to consider imposing a 25 percent tariff on $200 billion in Chinese imports, a much stiffer penalty than previously proposed, senior administration officials said Wednesday. The penalty would apply to a broad range of products, including refrigerators, bedsheets, clothing, furniture and toilet paper. Business groups have warned that such a steep tariff could drive up prices for millions of consumers and a number of them panned the White House announcement Wednesday... But White House officials said the potentially steep tariff was necessary to counter what they allege is the Chinese government’s decision to forcefully retaliate against a range of trade restrictions Trump has already imposed."
Here was Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross, in a Wednesday appearance on Fox Business Network: "We really have to do it... The president ultimately wants less tariffs, less non-tariff trade barriers, level playing field, low subsidies, the whole nine years. But to get there, we have to make it more painful for them to continue these bad practices."
China restates threat to strike back. The reaction from China's Ministry of Commerce, per Bloomberg. “China has made full preparation for the U.S. threats to escalate the trade war and will have to retaliate to defend national pride and the people’s interests."
Markets in Asia are swooning. More from Bloomberg: "A fresh round of trade-war fears sent stock markets sinking across Asia. Investors had nowhere to hide, with equity gauges from Japan to India plunging on Thursday. The MSCI Asia Pacific Index dropped as much as 1.4 percent, heading for its biggest slide in six weeks as more than $220 billion in equity-market value evaporated... The measure has lost 2.1 percent from a high less than a week ago."
— Congress tightens screws on Chinese investment. NYT's Alexandra Yoon-Hendricks: "Chinese investment in the United States is about to get a bit harder. Legislation expanding the powers of a federal body that reviews foreign investments in the United States for national security threats passed the Senate 87-10 on Wednesday as part of a $717 billion defense policy bill, and it is now headed to [Trump] for his signature. The bill... broadens the jurisdiction of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, or Cfius... Cfius’s expanded jurisdiction will give it a say in deals beyond mergers and acquisitions. Under the bill, joint ventures, minority stakes, and real estate transactions near military bases or other sensitive national security facilities all could be investigated — and potentially squashed — by Cfius."
— NAFTA talks progress. Reuters's Joseph White: “The United States and Mexico are getting close to a deal on the key issue of auto content rules at talks to renew the NAFTA trade pact, Mexican and Canadian officials said Wednesday. Guillermo Malpica, head of the trade and NAFTA office for the Mexican government, also said the United States had 'started showing more flexibility last week' on autos' content and other topics at the negotiations, which have dragged on for almost a year. Canadian trade negotiator Colin Bird told an auto industry conference in Michigan on Wednesday that NAFTA negotiators are making progress on auto content rules, and endorsed the concept of linking those rules to improving workers’ wages.”
— Steel magnate praises tariffs. The New York Times's Stanley Reed: “Lakshmi N. Mittal, the chairman and chief executive of ArcelorMittal, the world’s biggest steelmaker, is the rare business leader who applauds [Trump’s] protectionist approach to trade. For Mr. Mittal, the White House’s tariffs on steel imported into the United States have driven up prices, which, along with strong global demand, have delivered his company’s best results since 2011. On Wednesday, ArcelorMittal said profit rose to $1.9 billion in the second quarter, a 41 percent increase from the same period a year earlier, on sales of $20 billion. ... 'The industry has quite changed,' Mr. Mittal said in an interview after ArcelorMittal reported its results. 'Trade actions in various countries have really helped in structurally changing the landscape of the steel industry.' ”
— Trade war threatens a delicacy. The Post's Danielle Paquette: “The cost of pig feet was climbing, and Xu Min wondered: Had the trade war reached her market stall? The 29-year-old mother of two sells every part of the hog in a town known for braised hoofs, a classic snack here called trotters. She carves the meat for local vendors, who slather the feet in soy sauce and hawk them along a nearby canal for as little as 15 yuan, or about $2. Geopolitical sparring does not come up often at this market of fresh cuts, watermelon crates and crabs wriggling in plastic bags, Xu said, but lately she and other merchants have swapped grim predictions about the commercial fight between the United States and China. 'Importing less American pork will bring up the prices,' the butcher said, frowning behind her bloodstained counter. 'Fewer people will be buying — a bad effect.'”
MELTDOWN WATCH:
- “Trump calls Manafort prosecution ‘a hoax,’ says Sessions should stop Mueller investigation ‘right now.’” The Washington Post's John Wagner, Devlin Barrett and Carol D. Leonnig.
— Tesla posts big loss. The Post's Drew Harwell: “Tesla said Wednesday that it had burned less cash than expected during the second quarter and was nearing profitability, a long-doubted goal for the beleaguered automaker racing to boost production of its all-electric cars. The automaker said that it had made $4 billion in car, battery and leasing revenue during the second quarter of the year, a sharp increase over the same quarter last year because it had finally introduced its newest Model 3 sedan. The stock climbed about 4 percent in after-hours trading. Tesla’s second-quarter losses of $743 million were lower than analysts’ estimates, of about $900 million. But its cash burn extended a money-losing streak for chief executive Elon Musk during one of the company’s most challenging years in history.”
— Google wants to return to China. The New York Times's Li Yuan and Daisuke Wakabayashi: “Google withdrew from China eight years ago to protest the country’s censorship and online hacking. Now the internet giant is working on a censored search engine for China that will filter websites and search terms that are blacklisted by the Chinese government ... Google has teams of engineers working on a search app that restricts content banned by Beijing ... The company has demonstrated the service to Chinese government officials ... Yet the existence of the project does not mean that Google’s return to China is imminent ... Google often builds and tests different services that never become publicly available.”
— Icahn vs. Cigna. WSJ's Cara Lombardo and Dana Mattioli: "Activist investor Carl Icahn has built a sizable stake in Cigna Corp. and plans to vote against the health insurer’s $54 billion purchase of Express Scripts Holding Co., the latest sign of trouble for the planned tie-up. Mr. Icahn, whose stake amounts to less than 5% of Cigna’s shares outstanding, believes the company is paying too high a price for the pharmacy-benefit manager, which faces threats on a number of fronts, according to people familiar with the matter. Cigna in March agreed to pay what amounted to about $96.03 a share in cash and stock for Express Scripts. In a sign of shareholder fear that the deal won’t go through, Express Scripts stock was already trading well below the offer price and fell further after The Wall Street Journal reported on Mr. Icahn’s stance."
— Wall Street's new "Weinstein clause." Bloomberg's Nabila Ahmed: "Advisers are adding guarantees to certain merger agreements in light of the sexual misconduct scandals that have enveloped the producer Harvey Weinstein and other high-profile businessmen -- ones that legally vouch for the behavior of a company’s leadership. The development is a concrete example of how business is trying to adapt to the #MeToo era, at least in terms of legal liability. The move is particularly noteworthy given its source: the male-dominated world of M&A advisory where the terms of an offer can make or break a bid. In some cases, buyers have even negotiated the right to claw back some of the money they paid if subsequent revelations of inappropriate behavior damage the business."
— Senate approves spending bills. Politico's Jennifer Scholtes and Kaitlyn Burton: "Senators passed a four-bill spending package Wednesday, forging ahead in the federal funding process even as the president threatens to wreck it all with a veto-spurred government shutdown tied to border security. In a 92-6 vote, the Republican-led Senate signed off on a bundle that includes one quarter of the 12 annual spending bills covering a host of federal agencies. Passed was fiscal 2019 funding for the departments of Agriculture, Transportation, Interior, Treasury and HUD, as well as the EPA and IRS. After canceling all but one week of August recess, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell announced this week that leaders on both sides of the aisle aim to pass two more of the spending bills — Defense, and Labor-HHS-Education — by month’s end."
— Democrats are outraising Republicans. Bloomberg's Josh Green: Democrats have "caught a green wave of cash—the torrent of money pouring into Democratic campaign coffers helped 73 House candidates outraise Republican incumbents and opponents in races for open seats in the second quarter, a Bloomberg analysis of Federal Election Commission data shows... In the second quarter of this year, non-incumbent Democratic House candidates raised more than three times the amount they did in the same period in 2014. That works out to an average of $151,000 per candidate, compared with $101,000 in 2014."
Even as Dems struggle with whether to accept corporate cash. AP's Lisa Lerer reports that "money in politics is emerging as a new litmus test for Democratic candidates. In ads, stump speeches and debates, scores of politicians are pledging to reject corporate PAC donations. Their ranks include a handful of Democrats, including Harris, who are widely rumored to be exploring presidential bids: New Jersey Sen. Cory Booker, New York Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand and Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren. Joining them is Vermont’s independent senator, Bernie Sanders. In total, more than federal 170 candidates have said they’re not accepting corporate PAC donations."
— Muzinich advances. The Hill's Naomi Jagoda: "The Senate Finance Committee on Wednesday approved [Trump’s] nominee to be deputy Treasury secretary, but the top Democrat on the panel announced plans to put a hold on floor debate about the pick. The Finance Committee advanced Justin Muzinich’s nomination to be deputy Treasury secretary by a party-line vote of 14-13... But Finance Committee ranking Democrat Ron Wyden (Ore.) complained during the hearing that it was 'a struggle to get straight answers to questions that ought to have been low-hanging fruit.' Wyden cited as an example his question to Muzinich about whether Treasury had a role in preventing foreign governments from interfering in U.S. elections. Wyden also criticized Muzinich for saying that the new tax law will pay for itself — a claim that economists across the ideological spectrum refute."
— GM taps former Trump aide. Reuters's David Shepardson: "General Motors Co said on Wednesday it has tapped a former Trump administration economic and trade adviser to head its public policy efforts. The largest U.S. automaker said it hired Everett Eissenstat, who was until recently a senior White House aide on economic and trade issues, as its new senior vice president for global public policy. The 55-year-old Oklahoma native will report to Chief Executive Mary Barra."
— Wells to pay $2.09 billion fine. WSJ's Emily Glazer: "Wells Fargo & Co. agreed to pay $2.09 billion to settle with the Justice Department over the sale of toxic mortgage-backed securities in the lead-up to the financial crisis. The Justice Department said Wednesday it reached a civil settlement with Wells Fargo to end the long-running probe into the matter. Wells Fargo had already set aside funds to cover the settlement, in which it didn’t admit liability. The bank and the Justice Department had negotiated for several months over the amount, which at one point ranged between $2.5 billion and $3 billion, people familiar with the negotiations said. Wells Fargo Chief Executive Timothy Sloan said in a statement the bank is 'pleased to put behind us these legacy issues regarding claims related to residential mortgage-backed securities activities that occurred more than a decade ago.'”
Today
- Securities and Exchange Commission closed meeting.
From the New Yorker's Jon Adams:
White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders won’t condemn harassment of CNN reporter:
Four things to know about the QAnon conspiracy theory:
10-year-old shatters Michael Phelps’s record:"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "If there is one thing Donald Trump seems sure about, it is that the United States is getting a raw deal from China.
To people who spend time studying the United States’ economic relationship with China, Mr. Trump’s accounting of its dysfunctions contains both legitimate, accurate complaints and elements that completely misstate how things work between the world’s largest and second-largest economies.
“They’re killing us,” Mr. Trump has said in many debates, rallies and television appearances. He has threatened to put a 45 percent tax on Chinese imports “if they don’t behave.”
If you take Mr. Trump’s comments at face value, as president he would try to renegotiate a complex set of ties that has pulled hundreds of millions of Chinese out of dire poverty, made a wide range of goods available to American consumers at more affordable prices and contributed to the decline of American manufacturing.
Here is a reality check on Mr. Trump’s arguments. (It’s also a way to understand the economic relationship between the countries.)
The Trade Deficit
“We have very unfair trade with China. We’re going to have a trade deficit of $505 billion this year with China.” — Mr. Trump
America’s trade deficit with China was $338 billion last year, and there’s no reason to think it would swing by as much as Mr. Trump suggests in 2016 — but what’s $167 billion among codependent trading partners? (Mr. Trump seems to be conflating the China number with the $505 billion total American trade deficit in 2014, which was first reported to be that much.)
The central point, that the United States imports a lot more from China than it exports, is correct. To put it a bit differently, from 1999 to 2015 annual imports from China rose by $416 billion. In the same span, American exports to China rose by $145 billion.
That said, many economists would argue that a trade balance shouldn’t be viewed as a simple scorecard in which the country with the trade deficit is the loser and the one with the surplus the winner.
So the question isn’t whether there is a persistent, large trade deficit between the United States and China, but why. And that leads to another arm of Mr. Trump’s argument, and one of the stronger ones.
China Market Access
“I have many friends, great manufacturers, they want to go into China. They can’t. China won’t let them.” — Mr. Trump
It’s not that American multinational companies — heavy industry, technology or finance — can’t do business in China. Rather, their executives complain of Chinese government restrictions that they see as arbitrary, unpredictable and highly favorable to domestic companies — so much so that in practice they are either shut out or can’t make money in China.
Doing business in China typically requires a partnership with a Chinese company, and that often means sharing crucial intellectual property that can enable the partner to become a competitor down the road. The rules of engagement can change capriciously, especially for American and European companies, rendering major investments worthless.
American business interests have a long list of complaints: that the Chinese government uses its enforcement of antimonopoly rules to favor its domestic businesses; that the government subsidizes exports through tax rebates and other practices; that automakers can set up factories within China only as part of joint ventures and face stiff tariffs in trying to sell cars made in the United States.
The United States government has pushed China on these “market access” issues for years. But the situation seems to be growing worse, at least in the opinion of American executives. The American Chamber of Commerce in China regularly surveys its members about business conditions, and this year 57 percent of executives surveyed named “inconsistent regulatory interpretation and unclear laws” as a top problem, up from 37 percent in 2012.
This may reflect a faltering Chinese economy that is leading the government there to be more concerned than usual about protecting domestic companies.
Currency Manipulation?
“They are the single greatest currency manipulator that’s ever been on this planet.” — Mr. Trump
Mr. Trump’s complaint about China’s devaluation of its currency has a long, bipartisan tradition. It is also out of date.
It is true that China intervenes in currency markets to influence the price of its renminbi against the dollar. And it is true that a decade ago, both the American government and independent economists tended to think that the interventions served to depress the currency, in the Chinese government’s deliberate effort to make its exports more price competitive.
But a lot has changed in the last decade. The renminbi was allowed to rise sharply from roughly 2006 to 2015, and is up 23 percent from a decade ago.
And since last summer, China has let the currency drop some, but that appears to be an example not of manipulation, but of letting the price of the currency fall closer to the rate that reflects China’s fundamentals given the country’s slowing economy. The International Monetary Fund has argued that the renminbi, also known as the yuan, is no longer undervalued.
“At least in 2006, 2007 or 2008, the yuan was undervalued — now it’s probably not,” said Derek Scissors, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute and chief economist of China Beige Book, an information service.
Indeed, the Chinese government has been trying to restrict capital from flowing out of the country to stop the renminbi from falling any further. It would seem that the Chinese government and Mr. Trump are, for the moment at least, on the same side.
Manufacturing Decline
“What will happen if they don’t behave, we will put on a tax of some amount, and it could be a large amount, and we will start building those factories and those plants. Instead of in China, we’ll build them here.” — Mr. Trump
Mr. Trump’s broader argument is that a generation of unfair economic relations with China (and also Mexico, Japan and others) is a primary cause of the troubles of American workers.
Mainstream economists are more sympathetic to this view now than they were even a few years ago. Traditional trade theory holds that the losers from global trade — factory workers who lose their jobs when that factory moves overseas — are more than compensated by other opportunities created by a more efficient economy.
New scholarship suggests that the pain from globalization in certain geographic locations may be longer-lasting. One study found that Chinese imports from 1999 to 2011 cost up to 2.4 million American jobs.
That said, it’s easy to assign too much of the blame for the collapse of manufacturing employment to China or trade more broadly. Hundreds of millions of workers across the globe — many of whom were in dire poverty a generation ago — have become integrated into the world economy. That’s a lot of competition, all in a short span, for American factory workers.
At the same time, factory technology has advanced so that a company can make more stuff with fewer workers. The number of manufacturing workers in the United States has been declining as a share of all jobs nearly continuously since 1943, and the total number of manufacturing jobs peaked in 1979; China’s trade with the United States didn’t really take off until the 1990s.
In other words, trade has been an important economic force over the last few decades, and the deepening of the United States’ ties with China is one of the most important developments in global economics of the last generation. But to look at China as the sole force affecting the ups and downs of American workers misses the mark."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "The Commerce Department said Wednesday that — despite more than two years of President Trump’s “America First” policies — the United States last year posted a $891.2 billion merchandise trade deficit, the largest in the nation’s 243-year history.
The trade gap with China also hit a record $419 billion, underscoring the stakes for the president’s bid to reach a deal with Chinese President Xi Jinping as soon as this month.
The department’s final 2018 trade report, which was delayed by the partial government shutdown, showed that the United States bought far more in foreign goods than it sold to customers in Africa, Asia, Europe and North America. The shortfall topped the 2006 record of $838.3 billion, set as the housing bubble was peaking, and marked the third consecutive year of rising deficits.
A broader measure of the nation’s trade performance, which includes the services sector, showed a $621 billion deficit. That reflected a deterioration of more than $100 billion from the figure Trump inherited from president Barack Obama.
[Trump’s trade war has started. Who’s been helped and who’s been hurt?]
It has been evident for months that Trump was not shrinking a trade gap that he calls “unsustainable” and that he says represents a major transfer of wealth from Americans to foreigners. Over the past year, even as he imposed tariffs on foreign-made solar panels, washing machines, steel, aluminum and assorted goods from China, imports roared ahead of exports.
The president thus begins his reelection drive with a core campaign promise unfulfilled — and with a recent flurry of economic research showing that his embrace of tariffs is damaging the U.S. economy.
Economists say the trade deficit is swelling because of broad economic forces, including a chronic shortfall in national savings that was exacerbated by last year’s $1.5 trillion corporate and personal income tax cut. As cash-flush businesses and consumers increased their spending, purchases of imported goods rose while the overvalued dollar weighed on exports.
“Macroeconomics end up ruling. You can’t wish it away. You can’t tariff it away,” said William Reinsch, a former Commerce Department official now at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
The Commerce Department report comes amid indications that negotiations with China over a broad trade agreement may be in their final weeks. China has offered to buy a reported $1.2 trillion in additional American products over the next six years in a deal that reportedly would ease each side’s tariffs, usher in changes to Beijing’s state-led economic model and include tough new enforcement mechanisms.
But most economists say that such increased Chinese purchases probably would only divert U.S. shipments from other foreign customers, shrinking the trade gap with China but leaving the global balance largely unchanged. With the economy at or close to full employment, U.S. farms and factories have a limited ability to sharply increase output to meet a sudden increase in Chinese orders.
“That reality is not going to change,” said economist Matthew J. Slaughter, dean of the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth College.
Any deal with China would mark a milestone in Trump’s tariff war, although not its end. The Commerce Department on Monday began investigating whether imports of titanium sponges, used in chemical plants and military hardware, represent a national security threat.
The president has used similar studies to impose tariffs on steel and aluminum and has threatened to apply them to imported cars and car parts.
Trump persists with the import levies even as some supporters also push for him to act on other forces fueling the trade deficit, including a robust dollar.
The dollar is now valued 19 percent above its 10-year average against the currencies of major U.S. trading partners, according to Federal Reserve data.
The high dollar acts as a price increase for American exporters, making it harder to compete with foreign rivals.
“A competitive dollar is the most important tool we have to spur economic growth and job creation in the U.S. economy,” said Michael Stumo, chief executive of the Coalition for a Prosperous America.
[China has a big weapon that it hasn’t used in the trade war — yet. Tourists.]
The United States typically runs a sizable surplus in its global services trade, which includes spending by foreign tourists and students, financial services and consulting, partly offsetting the larger goods gap.
The best chance of the trade deficit shrinking anytime soon would require an economic downturn that no one wants. In 2009, amid the Great Recession, the trade deficit fell 40 percent from the peak three years earlier, to about $506 billion.
“If you want to lower the trade deficit, have a recession,” Reinsch said.
Trump has long been convinced that the United States gets a raw deal from its trade ties. As a New York real estate magnate in the 1980s, he routinely complained about Japanese auto companies and investors who bought iconic American properties such as Rockefeller Center and California’s Pebble Beach.
In a 2016 campaign speech in Pennsylvania, Trump called the trade deficit a “politician-made disaster” and promised swift change. “We can turn it all around — and we can turn it around fast,” he said.
Trump has used tariffs and import taxes more aggressively than any American president since the 1930s. In a March 2 speech at the Conservative Political Action Conference , he called them “the greatest negotiating tool in the history of our country” and credited them with bringing trade partners such as China to the bargaining table.
The president has negotiated new agreements with South Korea and North American neighbors Canada and Mexico, and he appears close to a deal with China. But it’s too soon to say what effect those agreements will have on the deficit.
Changes in U.S. tariffs called for in the South Korean deal took effect only on Jan. 1, while Congress has yet to act on the new North American agreement.
Still, tariffs have proved to be a blunt weapon. The president often boasts about how much money the U.S. government is reaping from tariffs.
“Billions of dollars, right now, are pouring into our Treasury,” he told the Conservative Political Action Conference on March 2, adding that Chinese exporters are absorbing almost the entire burden of the tariffs.
But a pair of new studies concludes that he is wrong. “When we impose a tariff, it is the domestic consumers and purchasers of imports that bear the full cost of the tariffs,” said David Weinstein, an economics professor at Columbia University, who co-wrote one of the papers.
Weinstein said the president appears to be relying on a 2018 analysis of data from the 1990s, when the United States represented a larger share of the global economy and had more leverage over exporters in other countries.
Weinstein’s study, co-written with Mary Amiti of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Princeton University’s Stephen J. Redding, reviewed what actually occurred last year after U.S. tariffs took effect. It concluded that Americans paid the entire tariff bill.
A second study — by four economists from the University of California at Los Angeles, Yale University, the University of California at Berkeley and Columbia University — reached the same conclusion.
That study also found that workers in Republican-leaning counties, especially in farm states, suffered the greatest losses from tariffs that U.S. trading partners imposed in retaliation for the president’s actions.
Trump’s tariffs also may cause U.S. companies to write off sizable investments in their Chinese factories as they scramble to shift operations to safer venues, said the study by Weinstein, Amiti and Redding. If the tariffs continue, about $165 billion worth of trade would be redirected each year, they added.
The study also found sizable costs relative to any expected benefits. If the tariffs led to the creation of 35,000 new manufacturing jobs — equal to all the steel and aluminum jobs lost in the past decade — they would cost $195,000 per job, the study found.
“The costs of the trade war are quite large relative to optimistic estimates of any gains that are likely to be achieved,” the three economists wrote."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Ukraine war: World Bank boss warns over global recession
By Annabelle Liang
Business reporter
- Published
- comments
- Comments
The head of the World Bank has warned that Russia's invasion of Ukraine could cause a global recession as the price of food, energy and fertiliser jump.
David Malpass told a US business event on Wednesday that it is difficult to "see how we avoid a recession".
He also said that a series of coronavirus lockdowns in China is adding to concerns about a slowdown.
His comments are the latest warning over the rising risk that the world economy may be set to contract.
"As we look at the global GDP... it's hard right now to see how we avoid a recession," Mr Malpass said, without giving a specific forecast.
"The idea of energy prices doubling is enough to trigger a recession by itself," he added.
Last month, the World Bank cut its global economic growth forecast for this year by almost a full percentage point, to 3.2%.
GDP, or Gross Domestic Product, is a measure of economic growth. It is one of the most important ways of measuring how well, or badly, an economy is performing and is closely watched by economists and central banks.
It helps businesses to judge when to expand and recruit more workers or invest less and cut their workforces.
Governments also use it to guide decisions on everything from tax to spending. It is a key gauge, along with inflation, for central banks when considering whether or not to raise or lower interest rates.
Mr Malpass also said that many European countries were still too dependent on Russia for oil and gas.
That's even as Western nations push ahead with plans to reduce their dependence on Russian energy.
He also told a virtual event organised by the US Chamber of Commerce that moves by Russia to cut gas supplies could cause a "substantial slowdown" in the region.
He said higher energy prices were already weighing on Germany, which is the biggest economy in Europe and the fourth largest in the world.
Developing countries are also being affected by shortages of fertiliser, food and energy, Mr Malpass said.
Mr Malpass also raised concerns about lockdowns in some of China's major cities - including the financial, manufacturing and shipping hub of Shanghai - which he said are "still having ramifications or slowdown impacts on the world".
"China was already going through some contraction of real estate, so the forecast of China's growth before Russia's invasion had already softened substantially for 2022," he said.
"Then the waves of Covid caused lockdowns which further reduced growth expectations for China," he added.
Also on Wednesday, China's premier Li Keqiang said the world's second largest economy had been hit harder by the latest round of lockdowns than it had been at the start of the pandemic in 2020.
He also called for more action by officials to restart factories after lockdowns.
"Progress is not satisfactory," Mr Li said. "Some provinces are reporting that only 30% of businesses have reopenedâ¦ the ratio must be raised to 80% within a short period of time."
Full or partial lockdowns were imposed in dozens of Chinese cities in March and April, including a long shutdown of Shanghai.
The measures have led to a sharp slowdown in economic activity across the country.
In recent weeks, official figures have shown that large parts of economy have been impacted, from manufacturers to retailers.
You may also be interested in:"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "President Trump officially began his campaign for re-election on Tuesday at a rally in Orlando, Fla., touching on themes and promoting accomplishments that are likely to be staples of his appearances from now until Election Day. Here’s a fact-check of his remarks.
Russia
“Nobody’s been tougher on Russia than Donald Trump.”
This is misleading.
Whether Mr. Trump has been “tougher” than any other president is subjective. But it’s worth noting that observers of American relations with Russia point to a disconnect between aggressive policies enacted by the Trump administration and not-so-tough language from Mr. Trump himself.
In his resignation letter in December, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis emphasized that his views on “treating allies with respect and also being cleareyed about both malign actors and strategic competitors” — Russia, for example — were not shared by Mr. Trump.
The Trump administration has indeed imposed sanctions, ordered a missile attack on Syria despite Moscow’s opposition and approved arms sales to Ukraine — actions that could be called “tough.”
Yet Mr. Trump himself has repeatedly denied or played down Russia’s interference in the 2016 election, contradicting his own intelligence agencies.
“My personal view is that his assertion would be laughable if it were not so dangerous,” Harley Balzer, a professor emeritus at Georgetown University and a Russia expert, previously told The New York Times.
Withdrawing American troops from Syria, where Mr. Balzer said Russia has accused a humanitarian relief group of being terrorists, “hardly sends a ‘tough’ message.”
This view seems to be shared by President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, who called Mr. Trump’s decision to withdraw American forces from Syria “correct.”
“In September, just before the election, the F.B.I. told President Obama about possible Russian interference and he did nothing because he thought that Hillary Clinton, crooked Hillary was going to win that’s why he did nothing. He did nothing.”
False.
Mr. Trump is free to argue that President Barack Obama did not do enough in response to Russia’s meddling in the 2016 election, as some Democrats have. But he is wrong that Mr. Obama did nothing at all.
Privately, Obama administration officials warned Russia against meddling and Mr. Obama confronted Mr. Putin directly at a Group of 20 summit meeting in China before the November 2016 vote. Publicly, intelligence agencies issued a joint statement in October 2016 that blamed Russia for hacked emails released on WikiLeaks and other websites.
After the election, Mr. Obama imposed sanctions on Russia and ejected from the United States 35 people who were suspected of being Russian intelligence operatives.
The wall
“We are building the wall. We’re going to have over 400 miles of wall built by the end of next year.”
This is exaggerated.
Mr. Trump is once again mixing projects to replace existing barriers with construction of entirely new sectors of a wall along the southwestern border — and inflating the mileage.
The Customs and Border Protection agency has received funding for 258 miles of barriers: 175 miles from congressional appropriations, 30 miles from a Treasury Department asset forfeiture fund and 53 miles from the Pentagon’s coffers, according to an agency spokesman.
That’s 142 miles under what Mr. Trump claimed. Even that figure relies on counting replacement projects as new wall, on contracts that have yet to be awarded and on funding that is tenuous. The 40 miles funded in the 2017 fiscal year, for example, is to replace old barriers with new fencing, while a federal judge in May blocked Mr. Trump from using the Pentagon funds to build his wall.
The economy
We enacted “the biggest tax cut in history.”
False.
Despite dozens of repetitions, this claim remains false. The $1.5 trillion tax cut, enacted in December 2017, ranks below at least half a dozen others by several metrics. The 1981 Reagan tax cut is the largest as a percentage of the economy and by its reduction to federal revenue. The 2012 Obama cut amounted to the largest cut in inflation-adjusted dollars: $321 billion a year.
“We are taking billions and billions of dollars in and — remember this, and you know it as well as I do — we have never taken in 10 cents from China. We would lose $500 billion a year with China.”
False.
The United States had a trade deficit of $381 billion in goods and services with China in 2018. The United States has collected tariff revenue on imports since the 1700s. Data compiled by Factcheck.org shows that the United States collected more than $10 billion in customs duties on Chinese imports every year from 2010 to 2016.
“Since the election, we have created six million new jobs. Nobody thought that would be possible. They said it wouldn’t be possible.”
This is exaggerated.
Mr. Trump is including almost three months when he was not yet president, but his figures are accurate. The economy added about six million jobs from November 2016 to May 2019. In the 28 full months since he’s been president, February 2017 to May 2019, the figure was about 5.4 million jobs.
Far from being previously impossible, the economy added about 6.1 million jobs in the 28 months before Mr. Trump took office.
“We have lifted more than six million Americans off of food stamps.”
True.
Participation in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program did decline by about 6.9 million people from November 2016 to March 2019.
“The unemployment rate is the lowest rate it’s been in over 51 years. Think of that. And as I said before about African-American, I now say also about Hispanic-American and Asian-American unemployment have reached the lowest rates in the history of our country”
True.
The unemployment rate was 3.6 percent in May 2019, the lowest since December 1969 when it reached 3.5 percent. The unemployment rate for Hispanics hit its lowest point, 4.2 percent, in May 2019. The rates for black Americans and Asian-Americans also reached their lowest points under Mr. Trump (5.9 percent in May 2018 and 2.2 percent in April 2019) but have since increased.
The military and veterans
“V.A. choice for the veterans. They’ve been trying to get that passed also for about 44 years.”
This is misleading.
The Veterans Choice Program was created in 2014 after the scandal of hidden waiting lists at the Department of Veterans Affairs, and allowed veterans to seek private health care funded by the government under certain conditions. Last June, Mr. Trump consolidated that and other existing programs, and expanded eligibility requirements.
“We are rebuilding the U.S. armed forces with $700 billion last year and $716 billion this year, far more than ever before.”
False.
Those are not the largest military budgets in recent history, let alone all of American history. Even if inflation is not taken into account, Mr. Obama signed a $726 billion National Defense Authorization Act for the 2011 fiscal year. Adjusted for inflation, Congress authorized more money for the Pentagon every fiscal year from 2007 to 2012, during the peak of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
We are “starting to remove a lot of troops” from the Middle East.
This is misleading.
After Mr. Trump announced the withdrawal of 2,000 troops from Syria, The Times reported in March that the Pentagon was planning to cut its combat force to about 1,000 by May and then pause. In contrast, Mr. Trump in May ordered the deployment of 1,500 troops to the Middle East to counter Iran, and this week ordered the deployment of another 1,000 troops to the region.
Health care
Terminally ill patients would “go all over the world looking for a cure. Because the F.D.A. would not approve what we call Right to Try. What a beautiful name, right to try. After 44 years, I got it approved.”
This is misleading.
A federal program known as compassionate use, or expanded access, has been in place since the 1970s. It allows patients with a serious disease or condition to obtain experimental medicines; the Food and Drug Administration says it authorizes 99 percent of the requests for expanded access that it receives.
Mr. Trump did sign a law last year that allows patients and doctors to ask drug companies directly for access to the experimental drugs, rather than wait for approval by the agency.
“For the first time in half a century, we’ve reduced the price of prescription drugs.”
This is misleading.
Multiple analyses have shown that drug prices are still increasing, albeit at a slower pace than in previous years. For example, Rx Savings Solutions, a company that advises employers on how to reduce drug costs, found that drug companies increased prices on more than 2,800 medicines in the first quarter of 2019. The average increase was 8.6 percent, compared with 11.3 percent in the same period last year.
Energy and Environment
“We’ve ended the last administration’s cruel and heartless war on American energy. What they were doing to our energy should never be forgotten. The United States is now the number one producer of oil and natural gas anywhere in the world.”
This is misleading.
The Energy Information Administration estimated that the United States became the largest producer of crude oil since 2013, according to the agency, undercutting Mr. Trump’s characterization of the Obama administration’s energy policies.
“We have among the cleanest and sharpest — crystal clean, you’ve heard me say it, I want it crystal clean — air and water anywhere on Earth.”
This is exaggerated.
The United States ranked 27th out of 180 countries in an environmental performance review, compiled by Yale and Columbia University researchers in collaboration with the World Economic Forum in 2018. (Switzerland topped the list.) The index placed the United States at 10th for air quality and 29th for water and sanitation."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Daily Business Briefing
University endowment managers, long criticized for the fees they pay to private equity firms and hedge funds, have something to show for it: eye-popping returns.
On Thursday, M.I.T. reported that its endowment had gained 56 percent in its most recent fiscal year, which ended in June. Yale also published its latest returns Thursday, with its endowment up 40 percent over the same period, its third-highest annual return since 1970. Dartmouth posted a return of nearly 47 percent. Duke reported a 56 percent return.
Harvard, which runs the biggest endowment (worth $53 billion), said Thursday that its fiscal-year return lagged many of its rivals, rising a mere 34 percent. Harvard’s endowment manager said this “tremendous” return nonetheless reflected “the opportunity cost of taking lower risk” than many of the school’s peers.
A big reason for the gains is investments with private equity firms, which in some years have received more in fees than endowments have paid out in tuition help. Harvard’s private equity investments, worth a third of its total portfolio, returned 77 percent in its latest fiscal year. Venture capital funds are also recording huge returns: The University of North Carolina logged a 142 percent return from that portion of its $10 billion endowment.
Many endowments, like Harvard’s, have increased their allocations to private equity, venture capital and hedge funds in recent years, saying that this provides crucial diversification from broader stock and bond market trends. These “alternative” investments can result in outsize returns, subject to hefty fees, but can be less predictable than more conservative choices.
The S&P 500 was up about 40 percent in the 12 months to June, putting endowments’ returns in perspective. Even with U.N.C.’s venture capital gains, its total endowment was up 42 percent. Yale’s fund had nearly 40 percent of its portfolio in private equity funds, and matched the return of a diversified index fund.
High returns also complicate the debate about big endowments’ tax status. One of the few tax increases that President Donald J. Trump pushed through was a 1.4 percent levy on the largest university endowments’ investment income. Facing lobbying by the affected institutions, Democrats have discussed reducing the tax as part of the spending bills slowly working their way through Congress. The bumper returns that many schools just reported could make that harder to justify.
Retail sales rose in September, the Commerce Department reported Friday, a second-straight month of gains as consumer spending dodged a hit from rising prices and widespread supply-chain disruptions.
The 0.7 percent increase in sales last month, which followed a 0.9 percent increase in August, was better than economists had expected. Along with the uptick in overall spending, sales at restaurant and bars, gas stations and clothing stores continued to rise in September.
Economists polled by Bloomberg had forecast a drop of 0.2 percent in overall sales.
Auto sales rose 0.5 percent in September, despite a shortage in semiconductors and shipment delays that have hampered the car market. Excluding auto sales, retail spending was up 0.8 percent, thanks in part to higher gasoline prices. Oil prices climbed to their highest level in seven years in recent weeks amid a global energy crunch, with only gradual efforts to lift production.
The gains come as supply chain disruptions tied to the pandemic persist and rising prices continue to dampen consumer confidence. The Conference Board’s Consumer Confidence Survey, a gauge for spending behaviors, fell in September after declines in the previous two months, prompted by the spread of the Delta variant of the coronavirus and inflationary pressures.
Prices of consumer goods rose more than expected in September, with people paying more for items like meat, eggs and furniture, the Labor Department reported on Wednesday. In response to rising inflation, the Social Security Administration announced the same day that benefits would increase 5.9 percent in 2022, the biggest jump in 40 years.
To relieve some of the supply chain issues, President Biden announced Wednesday that the Port of Los Angeles will double its hours of operation. The move comes ahead of the all-important holiday season and is intended to resolve a logjam that has slowed the shipment of manufactured goods from Asia.
Major companies including Walmart, UPS and FedEx will also expand their working hours in hopes of addressing backlogs in the global supply chains that deliver critical goods to the United States.
Goldman Sachs joined the rest of the country’s biggest banks in reporting profits that beat expectations, fueled by hot markets for stocks and corporate deals.
The Wall Street giant’s earnings rose to $5.38 billion, or $14.93 a share, for the three months ending in September. Investment bankers advising on mergers and acquisitions brought in a record $1.65 billion in revenue, up 225 percent from a year earlier, while equities traders posted a 51 percent jump in revenue to $3.10 billion.
“The third quarter saw strong operating performance and an acceleration of our investment in the growth of Goldman Sachs,” David M. Solomon, the company’s chief executive, said in a statement. He cited the acquisitions of NN Investment Partners, a European asset manager, and GreenSky, a financial technology company that originates home improvement loans, as efforts to expand its operations.
Earlier this week, deal makers pulled in record fees at Bank of America and record revenue at Morgan Stanley, while Citigroup had its best quarter for mergers and acquisitions in a decade. Their counterparts at JPMorgan also posted big numbers after cashing in on the strong market for advising companies.
Those four banks, along with Wells Fargo, which has a smaller Wall Street operation, all surpassed analysts’ predictions for their quarterly profits.
Alongside solid profits, industry leaders provided rosy predictions for a continuing economic rebound from the pandemic, even in the face of continued uncertainty about the spread of the coronavirus, rising inflation and persistent supply-chain headaches.
The Japanese automaker Toyota said on Friday that it would cut November production targets at home and abroad by as much as 15 percent as the pandemic and a global semiconductor shortage have made it difficult for the company to meet its short-term manufacturing goals.
Automakers worldwide have struggled to keep up with rebounding demand for their vehicles as pandemic restrictions in the world’s largest auto markets ease and consumers look to make up for lost time. The European Automobile Manufacturers’ Association said Friday that new car registrations in September were down 25 percent from a year ago, largely because of dealers don’t have enough cars to sell because of a shortage of semiconductors.
The global shortage of semiconductors — caused by such factors as supply chain woes and surging sales of home electronics during lockdowns — has hit the automotive industry hard, with Volkswagen reporting a 28 percent decline for September, the European manufacturers association said. Many automakers reduced orders for parts last year because of uncertainty about the pandemic’s effect on sales, and they are now struggling to source new components.
Other industry players have announced cutbacks in their manufacturing plans as a result, but Toyota, which had stockpiled chips, was able to hold out longer than its competitors.
In September, however, Toyota announced substantial cuts to its production targets for September and October, citing the lack of semiconductors and difficulties obtaining parts from suppliers in Southeast Asia hit by the coronavirus.
Toyota had initially planned to produce a million vehicles in November, hoping to make up for previous production shortfalls and meet strong global demand.
But continuing difficulties obtaining supplies have forced it to change those plans. The company now projects it will make 850,000 to 900,000 vehicles next month. It made 830,000 vehicles during the same period last year.
In a statement posted on its website, Toyota said that it still expected to meet its annual production forecast of nine million vehicles — adjusted down in September from 9.3 million — by the end of its fiscal year next March.
The company said that it was considering strategies to deal with its supply chain difficulties, noting that “we expect the shortage of semiconductors to continue in the long term.”
U.S. stocks rose on Friday, with the S&P 500 heading to extend its hefty gains from the day before. The index was up 0.5 percent in early trading, while the Nasdaq composite ticked up 0.3 percent.
The S&P 500 posted on Thursday its best day since early March, climbing 1.7 percent by the end of the trading session. The gains came after stronger-than-expected bank earnings, softer inflation data and a drop in U.S. unemployment claims resulted in a broad-based rally.
Wall Street is now on track for its best week since late August, rebounding from a weekslong malaise that had reflected concerns about the combination of accelerating inflation and slowing growth.
Retail sales unexpectedly rose in September, the Commerce Department reported Friday, climbing for the second-straight month as consumers spent more at restaurants and bars, gas stations and clothing stores.
Goldman Sachs shares rose 1.7 percent after the bank reported profit that beat expectations, fueled by a hot deal market and bustling stock markets.
Shares of airlines and hotel operators climbed after reports that the Biden administration would open the U.S. borders up to vaccinated foreign travelers. Delta Air Lines and Marriott International rose more than 2 percent.
Coinbase, the cryptocurrency exchange, started a prominent public policy campaign on Thursday, posting its blueprint for crypto regulations on GitHub, a software code-sharing platform, for public comment. “Our purpose in publishing this proposal was to contribute to a broad conversation and to do so openly and democratically,” a Coinbase spokeswoman told the DealBook newsletter.
Federal agencies are racing to address the potential risks in the fast-growing crypto industry, and a burgeoning lobby has emerged to influence the shape of regulations.
Coinbase is flipping the script. Traditionally, lawmakers and regulators solicit comments from the public when considering new rules and regulations. But Coinbase appears to be losing patience, feuding publicly last month on Twitter with the Securities and Exchange Commission over a proposed crypto product and now subtly co-opting the government’s role as representative of the people.
But old-fashioned lobbying is still important. Although Coinbase did not submit its proposal to the Senate Banking Committee, which recently requested input on crypto regulations, it met with staff at 30 congressional offices and engaged directly with at least 20 members of Congress before publishing it, the company told reporters. It also “reached out” to the S.E.C., it said.
Industry advocates are flooding the zone in Washington this week. The venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz, an early Coinbase investor, submitted its thoughts to the banking panel, and representatives have been making the rounds to advance the firm’s views. Katie Haun, a former federal prosecutor who co-leads Andreessen’s crypto fund, was also in town.
“Crypto knows how to get through to members,” Kristin Smith of the Blockchain Association told lawyers this week at a D.C. Bar Association event. The industry’s ability to engage with Congress and encourage enthusiasts to press its policy views is unique, she said. Crypto now has “more of a voice and a seat at the table,” she added. Mobilizing crypto Twitter — a “highly communicative community” — is the industry’s “special tool,” she said.
Rents are shooting higher after a brief pandemic slump, burdening households and fueling overall inflation. That is bad news for the Federal Reserve, because it could make the latest rapid price gains last longer. It’s also problematic for the White House because it hits households right in their pocketbooks, diminishing well-being and fueling unhappiness among voters.
A combination of factors seems to have created a perfect storm that pushed the Consumer Price Index measure of rent up 0.5 percent in September from the month before, the fastest pace in about 20 years.
That’s a concern for the Fed, because housing prices tend to move slowly and once they go up, they tend to stay up for a while, Jeanna Smialek writes for The New York Times. Rent data also feed into what is called “owners’ equivalent rent” — which tries to put a price on how much owners would pay for housing if they hadn’t bought a home. Together, housing measures make up about a third of the overall Consumer Price Index.
Overall consumer prices have jumped sharply in 2021, climbing 5.4 percent in September from the prior year. Fed officials have been betting that the move is temporary, but they are watching housing measures carefully as a risk to that outlook.
Rent is a big part of consumers’ experience with prices, so it could help shape their expectations about future cost increases.
Those expectations matter a lot to the Fed. If consumers come to anticipate faster inflation, they may begin to demand higher wages to cover their rising expenses. As businesses lift prices to cover rising costs, it could set off an upward spiral. Already, some key measures of inflation expectations have jumped higher.
Economic policymakers have said inflation will prove temporary, but rising rents may challenge that view and pressure Washington to react. READ THE ARTICLE →
Just as economies seemed to be returning to something like normal, an energy crunch has hit Britain, the rest of Europe and much of the world.
Natural gas, the main focus of this squeeze, is crucial for generating electricity, running factories and heating homes. It is also seen by some as a transition fuel away from highly polluting coal.
Prices for natural gas have risen about sixfold, to record levels. The surge means the wholesale price of electricity has reached stratospheric levels, and consumers, battered by the pandemic, are hit by big increases in their home energy bills. These high costs are also undermining the economics of companies that make fertilizer, steel, glass and other materials that require a lot of electricity.
Britain, whose power system depends heavily on gas, is taking some of the hardest blows, creating major headaches for the government of Prime Minister Boris Johnson
The jump in gas prices is also making geopolitical waves. Russia, Europe’s largest gas supplier, is being blamed for manipulating prices. The United States, in turn, has warned Moscow not to try to exploit the gas crunch for its own ends. The pinch could open the way for more exports of liquefied natural gas from shale drilling in the United States.
Stanley Reed, who reports on energy and the environment for The New York Times from London, answers questions about the crunch, including why natural gas prices have jumped so high and why Britain is in such bad shape. READ THE ARTICLE →"
frame of article is: industry
###
article: "Generous Family Policies Spur Resurgent Birth Rate But Stress Public Finances

Updated Nov. 26, 2013 3:10 am ET

BOUSIGNIES, France—With nearly 30% more children than five years ago, the two-classroom elementary school in this tiny northern French village is bursting at its seams: Preschoolers bunch together in a narrow room for naps and teachers can barely pass through the crowded canteen at lunch.

But the village has struggled to cover the €1 million ($1.35 million) cost of building a new school, and budget cuts have reduced state support for the plan.

Behind Bousignies's mounting education costs and its difficulties in paying for them are two colliding trends: France's unabated baby surge and its increasingly stretched public finances.

"It's a big endeavor for our small place," said Michel Dewitte, Bousignies's mayor, who has pledged to build a new school since 2008. "But the number of children has been growing and we need to keep up."

With an average 2.01 children born to every woman, France boasts the highest birthrate in the European Union after Ireland and, in recent years, has been producing babies at rates not seen in the country since the 1970s. The ratio is a source of national policy pride: While Europe's overall population is projected to decline in the coming decades, France's is expected to grow, providing a more stable group of working adults to help support both the young and old.

France has achieved its mini baby boom with some of Europe's most generous subsidies for families, as well as child-care access. Spending on family policy—including subsidies, tax breaks for parents and state-funded help for housing—equals nearly 4% of the country's gross domestic product, the highest ratio among the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development's 34 industrialized member countries and nearly double the 2.2% average.

But Bousignies's financial challenges provide a window into the flip side of France's baby surge. More babies, children and students need nurseries, schools and universities—infrastructure the French government is increasingly struggling to finance off a deficit-ridden budget. Many young adults remain under direct state assistance—through an array of social security allowances— because the country isn't creating enough jobs. A new financial-support program to assist as many as 100,000 unemployed youth is projected to cost up to €600 million a year.

France's growing population represents a major test for Socialist President François Hollande, who must reconcile his goal to repair public finances with his central electoral pledge of not abandoning young generations.

At stake is whether France can continue to spend significantly more than any other Western country on a welfare system—which analysts say has contributed to the nation's high birthrate—when it is largely running on debt.

France's gross domestic product grew a nominal 0.5% between 2009 and 2012, while the country's debt rose sharply and is expected to reach 93.4% of GDP this year. Welfare spending, including programs for youth, the unemployed and the elderly, is set to reach 31.7% of GDP this year, the highest ratio among the 34 OECD nations. French unemployment has risen to a 15-year high of 11%.

Meanwhile, in neighboring Germany—which is struggling with one of Europe's lowest birthrates—the economy expanded a nominal 2.7% between the 2008 financial crisis and 2012. Debt—which was proportionally higher than France's in 2008—peaked at 81.9% of GDP and is projected to start shrinking this year. Berlin has reined in the increase in welfare spending, which is expected to account for 26.1% of GDP this year.

Though Germany's low birthrate of 1.4 babies per women means it will be increasingly tougher for its shrinking workforce to support its aging population, Germany currently boasts one of the lowest youth unemployment rates in the euro zone. Economists say that is a result not just of its robust competitiveness and economic growth but also of a shrinking pool of youth able to fill jobs.

The French government says it is confident that efforts to revive economic growth will pay off, something that will help replenish the state coffers and put its social-security model on sound financial footing. But many economists say France can't escape a deeper revision of its welfare system, including its revered family-promoting policies.

"The trend is clear, and the direction problematic," said Jacques Cailloux, Nomura's chief European economist, based in London. "The French government's efforts to contain social spending aren't sufficient."

Upon taking office in May 2012, Mr. Hollande vowed to do both: reduce the budget shortfall and invest in future generations. He said his government would trim the deficit to 3% of gross domestic product in 2013, compared with 5.3% in 2011. At the same time, he earmarked €7.5 billion to pay for 60,000 additional state teachers over the course of his five-year mandate and said children would be admitted in state-run kindergartens from the age of two, instead of three.

"We can't accept to sacrifice our youth," Mr. Hollande said in December 2012.

Less than a year after his election, however, Mr. Hollande was confronted with a tough reality. Unemployment kept rising while public-deficit figures came in higher than expected.

Still, the French government went ahead with a plan to create 150,000 state-sponsored jobs for young adults at a cost of €3.5 billion a year. Last month, it also started an experimental welfare scheme that guarantees a minimum monthly allowance of about €500 to some 10,000 jobless youth, a measure it is planning to ramp up in coming years to cover 100,000 young adults.

Earlier this year, the president sought to curb family allowances benefiting rich households. He proposed to shrink a tax loophole open to all families with children irrespective of their income, and restrict it to poorer households only. Uproar from family associations led Mr. Hollande to scrap his original proposal and to trim the benefit only marginally.

To reduce public spending, the government did slash funding for the country's army and for the foreign affairs ministry, shutting down embassies in several countries. Plans to build new high-speed train lines and water canals were also shelved indefinitely.

But when it presented the draft 2014 budget, the government acknowledged that the 3% deficit target, which had already been abandoned for 2013, would be postponed until 2015.

"We must redress public finances while at the same time safeguarding the French welfare state," said Socialist lawmaker Karine Berger, a member of the Finance Commission at the National Assembly and an adviser to Mr. Hollande. "It's a narrow path, and the strategy is difficult to fine-tune."

In Bousignies, mayor Mr. Dewitte has been juggling the same problems. Building a new school was the core pledge of his 2008 election platform. But the rue du Marais, a cobblestone street running from the village's chapel out to the countryside, was ravaged with potholes and had to be repaired first. Mr. Dewitte, a professional accountant, put the school project on the back burner.

Last year, as the mayor sought ways to revive the plan, bad news came from Paris: the central government, struggling with its own budget cuts, would only cover 30% of the cost, less than the standard 40%.

With a yearly budget of €700,000, the village has decided to take a loan to come up with its share. France's education ministry pays for the teachers, but the village will have to cover an extra supervisor for the school at a cost of €24,000 a year, a 30% increase in Bousignies's payroll.

"It's a lot of money," Mr. Dewitte said. "But it is an investment for the future."

Write to Gabriele Parussini at gabriele.parussini@wsj.com

87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8"
frame of article is: other
###
article: "On the campaign trail, Donald J. Trump has promised to do quite a few things that are beyond the powers of an American president, like billing Mexico for a border wall. But when it comes to foreign trade, his powers as president would come closer to his expansive ambitions.
As president, Mr. Trump could seek to penalize other nations for undercutting American manufacturers or stealing American ideas. He could also pursue congressional legislation to impose a 45 percent tariff, or tax, on imported Chinese goods, as he has proposed.
The bottom line, some experts say, is that Mr. Trump might well be able to squeeze China.
That does not mean, however, that his punitive approach would ease America’s economic pains. In fact, a range of experts agree that Mr. Trump’s proposals are more likely to deepen those problems, particularly if China or other targeted nations retaliate, rather than accept his demands.
Starting a trade war might be cathartic for workers who have lost jobs, but it is unlikely to create a lot of factory work.
“There’s no way a tariff of this kind could deliver the kind of benefits that he’s talking about, and it’s quite wrong to think that the big problem for American workers has been foreign trade,” said J.W. Mason, a professor of economics at John Jay College and a fellow at the Roosevelt Institute, a liberal think tank. “But I think it could be very destructive for the rest of the world.”
Mr. Trump’s views on trade are among his oldest and steadiest public policy positions. He has long maintained that other countries are taking advantage of the United States because Americans spend more money on foreign goods than the rest of the world spends on American goods. And he has long argued for slapping higher tariffs on those foreign goods in order to fortify the American economy.
Trade was the first policy issue Mr. Trump mentioned last Tuesday in a speech after his latest round of victories in five northeastern primaries.Continue reading the main story
“Our jobs are being sucked away from our country and we’re not going to let it happen anymore, folks,” he said at a victory party in New York that night.
It emerged again Wednesday in Washington during what was billed as a major foreign policy speech.
This Tuesday, Mr. Trump hopes to sweep the delegates in Indiana and all but sew up the Republican nomination. Nowhere has trade figured more centrally than in the Hoosier State, where the air conditioner maker Carrier opted to move operations to Mexico, becoming a recurrent feature in Mr. Trump’s anti-free-trade litanies.
China has prospered over the last few decades by focusing its economy on low-cost manufacturing for foreign markets. Exports to the United States soared, particularly after China joined the World Trade Organization in 2001. American businesses and consumers bought $481.9 billion in Chinese goods in 2015, about one-fifth of all imports and the most from any country. But manufacturing employment in the United States has fallen sharply. A 2013 study estimated that China’s rise had eliminated at least one million domestic factory jobs.
In the current campaign, Mr. Trump has proposed a 45 percent tax on Chinese imports and a 35 percent tax on Mexican imports. He has also proposed tariffs on goods that specific American companies produce in foreign countries, including Carrier air-conditioners and Ford automobiles.
Mr. Trump has said the threat of such tariffs would persuade China, for example, to modify the economic policies that he describes as providing unfair advantages to Chinese companies. Rather than incur his wrath, he says, American companies would be persuaded to keep more of their factories close to home.
“The 45 percent is a threat that if they don’t behave,” Mr. Trump said at a Republican debate in Miami last month, the United States “will tax you.”
He added: “It doesn’t have to be 45; it could be less. But it has to be something because our country and our trade and our deals and most importantly our jobs are going to hell.”
As president, Mr. Trump would have some latitude to reverse a course that the nation has pursued for decades. But the results could be troublesome on multiple fronts. The removal of trade barriers has played a significant role in reducing global poverty and encouraging peace between nations, achievements that could be eroded by tit-for-tat backsliding.
“The basic principle is that a sovereign state enters trade agreements of its free will, and it can get back out,” said Robert Howse, the Lloyd C. Nelson professor of international law at N.Y.U. School of Law. “But that’s the easy part.”
Imposing sweeping tariffs would reverse a mainstay of United States foreign policy. Beginning after World War II, the United States gradually reduced its import taxes and pushed other nations to do the same, seeking not only to promote increased trade but to prevent conflict. The United States now imposes average weighted import tariffs of just 1.4 percent, according to the World Bank, among the lowest rates in the world.
Under existing laws, Mr. Trump could impose tariffs only on specific categories of imports, not whole countries, and only by demonstrating specific violations of trade rules, such as export subsidies. “There are at least 50 sets of laws and regulations that exist that China has, at least in spirit, crossed the boundaries,” Sam Clovis, an adviser to Mr. Trump, said in an interview.
But Mr. Trump would have the difficult task of proving that China is breaking the rules before the World Trade Organization, which polices global commerce. International trade laws limit the type of help governments can provide to companies, but the role of the Chinese government is particularly opaque, said Mark Wu, a professor of law at Harvard and a former United States trade negotiator in the administration of President George W. Bush.
“China’s economy is its own beast, and it has a form that was not envisioned at the time these rules were created 20 years ago,” Mr. Wu said. “W.T.O. rules are not necessarily equipped to address all of the problematic aspects of that China Inc. system as far as American exporters are concerned.”
In fact, one of Mr. Trump’s favorite charges, that China and other nations are suppressing the value of their currencies, is actually not a violation of existing trade agreements.
A central problem is defining currency manipulation in a way that excludes the United States — in particular, the Federal Reserve’s post-recession stimulus campaign, which had the effect of weakening the dollar much in the same way that other countries do to their currency.
Alternatively, Mr. Trump could pursue the radical option of seeking legislation to impose a broad China tariff, in effect demolishing the rules of global trade.
“It would be a flagrant violation,” said Alan O. Sykes, a professor of law at Stanford and an expert on international economic relations. “There is no prior violation of W.T.O. law that would be even close.”
The impact of such legislation would touch almost every aisle at Walmart.
in 2015, Americans bought $14.2 billion worth of Chinese shoes, $2.5 billion of Chinese jewelry and $593 million of Chinese rugs. And, most of all, cellphones — $64 billion worth, according to the Commerce Department.
All told, the United States imported $481.9 billion in Chinese goods in 2015, a record.
But research suggests that the price of Chinese goods would rise by significantly less than 45 percent because companies would hold the line to preserve their market share. Consumers can also buy comparable goods. When the United States imposed a 35 percent tariff on Chinese tires in 2009, imports of tires from China declined while imports from Indonesia, Mexico and Thailand rose sharply.
For the same reasons, however, economists see little chance that a tariff would achieve Mr. Trump’s goal of encouraging domestic production. They say it is even less likely to create large numbers of new factory jobs. American manufacturing output is at the highest level in history and employment has fallen because of large gains in efficiency, a trend that is unlikely to reverse.
China could retaliate by imposing its own tariffs. China responded to the tire tariff, for example, by imposing a tariff on American chicken parts.
The United States sold $116.2 billion in goods to China in 2015, including aircraft parts, automobiles and semiconductors — high-value industries in which workers earn high wages. Losing China’s market could mean sacrificing better jobs for less desirable ones.
Doug Oberhelman, chairman and chief executive of Caterpillar, described higher tariffs as “very dangerous” in February. “We’re 5 percent of the world population,” said Mr. Oberhelman, who spoke in his capacity as president of the Business Roundtable, a pro-trade lobby. “Ninety-five percent of our potential customers are elsewhere. We’ve got to learn and figure out how to deal with that.”
The damage to international trade agreements could also have deep and enduring consequences.
One of the central benefits of the current system is that it separates trade disputes from other kinds of conflict. The global effort to reduce tariffs after World War II “was dreamed up as a way to prevent world wars,” said Mr. Howse, the N.Y.U. professor. “That should not be forgotten.”Continue reading the main story"
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Chinese consumers for the first time last year bought more Cadillacs than Americans did, helping drive profits at General Motors. And though the designs for those Cadillacs may have been drafted in Detroit, nearly all of the luxury automobiles were assembled in China by some of GM’s nearly 60,000 local workers.
This growing dynamic — of American companies serving Chinese consumers with products made in China — marks a shift in global trade that could pose a significant challenge to President Trump’s “America First” agenda.
Trump has based his campaign to refashion economic relations with China on the well-established notion that the country undercut American workers through low-wage manufacturing of goods exported to the United States.
That campaign entered a new chapter this week when Trump once again hiked tariffs on Chinese goods after declaring himself dissatisfied with the pace of negotiations on a new trade agreement.
But whether he succeeds in securing a trade deal, many economists and executives say, the nature of the business relationship between the United States and China already is being redefined.
After four decades of economic reform, China is morphing from a low-wage exporter into the largest consumer market for a growing number of industries, including automobiles, video games and computers.
“We’re at the end of a period of the globalization of production,” said William Overholt, a senior fellow at Harvard University’s Asia Center. “We’re at the beginning of a period of globalization of consumption in which the center of gravity moves from baby boomers in the west to the relatively young Chinese.”
[Small towns are dying everywhere but here]
A decade ago, for instance, Chinese consumers bought 71 percent of the products manufactured in China, according to the McKinsey Global Institute. Today, the Chinese buy 85 percent of what they produce — and their economy is three times larger.
By next year, China’s per-person income will have doubled since 2010, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
The phenomenon, which is also seen in other quickly developing countries like India and Indonesia, will create a new set of winners and losers.
In the United States, the principal beneficiaries of the era of globalized consumption are likely to be investors and highly skilled employees, rather than the blue-collar workers who suffered as companies moved overseas.
“It’s definitely a profits story,” said Dean Baker, senior economist at the Center for Economic and Policy Research. “It’ll have very little to do with any jobs here.”
In the past, Americans bought up the low-cost goods made in China, which was a boon for Chinese workers and also for cost-conscious Americans. But, in seeking to cater to the Chinese consumer, the reverse is not true. American companies instead are setting up factories there and in other developing markets.
Already, United States -based multinationals have been creating jobs faster in China than at home, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Since 2009, corporations have increased their Chinese workforce by 86 percent to 1.7 million — roughly four times the rate of increase at home.
For Trump, that means a trade policy that often seems to promise a return to an earlier era before globalization could disappoint, even if he secures a good deal with the Chinese.
Administration officials say they are making headway rebalancing trade relations with China and other countries to rectify mistakes made by Trump’s predecessors. A new North American trade deal, for example, requires more auto manufacturing to be done in the United States. (It still needs to be passed by Congress.) The president’s tariffs are credited with reviving steel production, one factor in the addition of 452,000 new manufacturing jobs during his tenure.
Other trends also could benefit the United States. Rising wages in countries such as China and increasing automation are making labor costs relatively less important in determining the location of new factories. That makes the U.S. more attractive as an investment destination, though rising automation means new plants require fewer American workers than the factories that closed earlier this century, vaporizing 6 million jobs.
In trade talks with Beijing, the administration also is seeking greater access to the Chinese market, which could aid U.S. export prospects. But the biggest new opportunities may do little for blue-collar workers who lost out over the past 20 years of growing U.S.-China trade ties.
U.S. negotiators are pushing the Chinese to open their markets for industries such as financial services, insurance and cloud computing. These are profitable endeavors, but ones that favor the well-educated and skilled.
The president has often portrayed a narrative of global commerce that puts the United States — not foreign markets — at the center. He calls it a “privilege” for other countries to sell into the U.S. market. And his decision to quit a 12-nation Pacific trade deal, known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership, on his fourth day in office left American companies at a disadvantage in key Asian markets at a time when developing countries are driving the growth in global demand.
Now, many executives say they do not expect the United States to reclaim its role as the globe’s dominant market.
Craig Allen, president of the U.S.-China Business Council, which represents companies such as Amazon, Goldman Sachs and Procter & Gamble, said the administration’s stance presents multinationals with a dilemma.
“A company told me today they feel some tension between what their shareholders are telling them and what the Trump administration is telling them,” said Allen, a former U.S. diplomat. “The administration is suggesting or emphasizing investment in the U.S. That’s not where the market is; that’s not where the market growth is.”
To be sure, despite consumption’s blossoming role in China’s growth, the country remains one of the world’s top exporters and enjoys a sizable merchandise trade surplus. Brad Setser, a former White House economist in the Obama administration, said talk of a new era is premature.
“This is one possible future evolution of the global economy. It isn’t necessarily the trajectory we’re already on,” he said.
The Chinese economy also has slowed from its double-digit growth pace of earlier this decade, and many business executives doubt President Xi Jinping’s commitment to further market-oriented reforms. China faces a daunting corporate debt burden that some economists warn could spark a financial crisis and delay the onset of a new economic era.
The typical Chinese individual also still earns much less than an American. In terms of purchasing power parity, which takes account of each country’s living costs, Chinese per-capita income is about $16,000, compared with roughly $60,000 in the United States.
Still, China has firmly established itself as a top opportunity — if not the top opportunity — for a wide range of American companies, including Apple, Walmart and Caterpillar. Over the past decade, per-person income in China has grown by 120 percent, compared with just 15 percent in the United States , according to Andy Rothman, an investment strategist with Matthews Asia in San Francisco.
“This is the world’s best consumer story,” Rothman said.
China’s growing prosperity is part of a broader transformation of developing countries that is affecting the volume of goods traded across borders, the design of industry supply chains and the mix between factory labor and robots.
By 2030, fast-growing developing countries led by China are expected to account for 51 percent of global consumption, nearly double their 2007 share, according to a study by McKinsey Global Institute.
Companies in the advanced economies, including the United States , the European Union and Japan, last year sold $4.5 trillion worth of goods, including machinery, chemicals and cars, to customers in poorer nations.
“This is exactly the wrong time to be putting up barriers to trade,” said Susan Lund, a McKinsey partner who directed the study.
[Companies prepare for a world of permanent tariffs]
In recent years, China accounted for more than one-third of global economic growth — roughly equal to the combined contributions of the United States, Europe and Japan, according to the International Monetary Fund.
For General Motors, that translated into deliveries of 3.65 million vehicles last year to Chinese buyers, compared with fewer than 3 million to Americans. The automaker earned $2 billion last year from its joint ventures in China.
“We posted the highest global sales mark in Cadillac’s 116-year history of 382,184 units, primarily on the strength of our performance in China,” Steve Carlisle, senior vice president of General Motors, told an investor conference last month.
U.S. multinationals that prosper overseas typically add jobs back home at their headquarters, research labs and design studios. Successful ventures like Cadillac’s generate profits that flow to the corporate bottom line, generating job-creating innovations for Americans.
But those gains tilt toward investors and better-educated workers.
“The benefit of Chinese consumers buying more Cadillacs accrue more to shareholders and very high-skilled people. You’ll see more of an unbalanced distribution of benefits,” said Sergi Lanau, deputy chief economist for the Institute of International Finance."
frame of article is: macro
###
article: "Thousands of pages of Donald Trump’s tax returns shed some light on his extensive business empire, both before and during his presidency, as well as his changing fortunes during his time in the Oval Office.
In his final year in office, 2020, he paid no income tax, according to his tax returns that were released Friday by the House Ways and Means Committee. Democrats spent years pursuing the financial documents that previous presidents and White House candidates voluntarily released.
Here is some of what we learned when the returns were first made public Friday.
1. Trump’s fortunes rose and fell, as he aggressively reported losses.
Throughout his campaign and presidency, Trump earned money from a wide variety of sources, including real estate, his earlier career as a TV personality, and a multitude of businesses such as golf clubs and wine. His gross income ran into the hundreds of millions of dollars. But he reported deductions to reduce that income — and the taxes he would owe on it. From 2015 to 2020, he reported a negative adjusted gross income in four out of six years. His reported income ranged from negative $32 million to $24 million.
2. The Trumps contributed inconsistently to charity.
Trump’s charitable contributions declined over the course of his presidency. He donated $1.8 million in 2017 and about half a million dollars in each of the next two years. In 2020, as many nonprofits intensified their calls for donations as they scrambled to help victims of the coronavirus pandemic and the associated unemployment, the Trumps reported giving no money to charity.
Trump repeatedly promised that he would donate his $400,000 annual salary for each year that he served as president, and he generally contributed his salary to federal agencies. IRS rules say that taxpayers who give money to government agencies “solely for public purposes” can deduct those gifts as charitable contributions on their tax returns. Trump’s failure to take any charitable deduction in 2020 suggests that he didn’t donate his presidential salary that year — and that if he donated his salary in the two prior years, that represented most of his charitable giving each year.
A spokesman for Trump did not directly respond to questions from The Washington Post about Trump’s lack of a charitable deduction for his salary donations in 2020 but did note that Trump previously said he gave money from his salary that year to the National Park Service and to the Department of Health and Human Services’ coronavirus response efforts.
3. Trump has bank accounts in several foreign countries and earned money in many nations while he was president.
Trump said in his tax filings that he had completed paperwork required of any American who has a financial account in another country worth more than $10,000. At various times, he said, he had such accounts in China, Ireland, the United Kingdom and St. Martin. He reports earning money in a far longer list of foreign countries.
4. Why did Trump pay any taxes at all? Thank the Alternative Minimum Tax.
Trump reported such substantial losses from his businesses that in many years, his tax bill would have been $0 under ordinary rules for income taxes. But the United States has a system called the Alternative Minimum Tax that is meant to make sure very rich people don’t get away with paying an inordinately low tax bill. In Trump’s case, this alternate calculation method required him to pay at least some taxes in more years than he otherwise would have, by making him add some of his deductions back into his income. The Trumps are among about 200,000 taxpayers subject to this method of calculating their taxes.
5. The Trumps supported the Presidential Election Campaign Fund.
On the Trumps’ tax returns, the opening pages read, “Occupation: President” and “Spouse occupation: First Lady.”
While Americans generally can’t choose what use the government puts their tax dollars toward, there is an exception: Every taxpayer gets to choose whether $3 of their taxes go into the Presidential Election Campaign Fund.
Candidates for president can tap into this fund only if they agree to cap their own campaign fundraising in exchange for receiving federal funding. Trump did not participate; no major candidate has since 2008.
But he and his wife, Melania, did both choose to put $3 into the pot for future candidates to use — making them among only about 4 percent of Americans who chose to contribute to the fund in 2020.
Want to know more? Read more about the release of the returns in our coverage here. Check out the congressional committee’s summary of their findings. And below, find the top numbers from each year of Trump’s taxes.
2015
Adjusted gross income: -$31,756,435
Tax based on income and AMT: $2,127,670
Final tax bill after credits: $641,931
Total income: -$31,736,841
2016
Adjusted gross income: -$32,409,674
Tax based on income and AMT: $2,234,725
Final tax bill after credits: $750
Total income: -$32,190,169
2017
Adjusted gross income: -$12,916,948
Tax based on income and AMT: $7,435,857
Final tax bill after credits: $750
Total income: — $12,819,400
2018
Adjusted gross income: $24,395,093
Tax based on income and AMT: $8,356,232
Final tax bill after credits: $999,466
Total income: $24,395,093
2019
Adjusted gross income: $4,380,714
Tax based on income and AMT: $558,780
Final tax bill after credits: $133,445
Total income: $4,443,503
2020
Adjusted gross income: -$4,795,757
Tax based on income and AMT: 0
Final tax bill after credits: 0
Total income: -$4,694,058"
frame of article is: other
###
article: "Jeb Bush’s Wealth Soared When He Left Governor’s Office, Tax Returns Show
After he left office as governor of Florida, Jeb Bush’s net worth grew to at least $19 million from $1.3 million, a significant leap in wealth that reflects the power of his connections and the breadth of his entrepreneurial pursuits.
Mr. Bush and his wife, Columba, reported $28.5 million in adjusted gross income from 2007, the year he left office, through 2013, according to tax returns he released on Tuesday. Nearly $10 million came from his speaking engagements.
The Bushes’ income topped out at $7.3 million in 2013, the last of 33 years of returns he made public. The return showed that they paid $2.9 million in federal taxes on that income, for an effective tax rate of 40 percent.
Mr. Bush’s disclosure of voluminous financial records comes early in a presidential campaign that has elevated the issue of candidates’ wealth, and the way it may distance them from ordinary Americans in an era of economic uncertainty.
After he left state politics eight years ago, Mr. Bush made clear that he wanted to make money. The mystery was just how much he had made.
The Bush campaign reported that the couple’s total net worth is now between $19 million and $22 million.
The wealth of America’s political dynasties is emerging as a major theme of the 2016 campaign. And while the fortune amassed by Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton dwarfs what Mr. Bush collected, the records show that he similarly had little difficulty leveraging his prominent name to gain millions of dollars in the private sector.
Mr. Bush said his wealth has also allowed for significant charitable contributions. The couple reported $110,616 in donations on their 2013 return. In a statement on his website, Mr. Bush said they donated $739,000 to charity from 2007 to 2014.
“I’m proud of what Columba and I have contributed,” he said.
The effective tax rate of 40 percent that Mr. Bush paid compares with the 13.9 percent rate that Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican presidential candidate, reported paying in 2010, a figure that drew widespread criticism.
The release of the returns, 16 months before the general election, is intended to position Mr. Bush as particularly open to scrutiny compared with other candidates. It included filings for several years that had previously been disclosed during his campaigns for governor. The Bush campaign said he has requested extensions for filing his 2014 taxes and his financial disclosure report, which will include details of his assets and liabilities.
Deep in the 2013 filing, he reported $5.8 million in “consulting and speaking” income. Separately, Mr. Bush’s campaign provided details of his engagements showing that he delivered about 260 paid speeches from 2007 to the present, for which he earned a total of $9.95 million. He listed 10 speeches at the Poongsan Corporation, a South Korea-based copper manufacturer that has long ties to the Bush family. His most recent audiences included the National Automobile Dealers Association and the American Council of Life Insurers.
The campaign did not release details of the income from his consulting engagements.
In the early going of the 2016 campaign, the candidates’ financial and business affairs have drawn particular scrutiny. Their wealth can be seen as a double-edged sword, signifying both financial acumen but also socioeconomic distance from most voters at a time when income inequality is a pressing issue.
Among the field of candidates, Mrs. Clinton disclosed in May that she and her husband had made at least $30 million since the start of 2014, largely from giving paid speeches. Senator Marco Rubio reported that he cashed out a retirement account last year. And in June, as he announced his candidacy, Donald Trump held up a document showing his net worth to be around $8.7 billion.
Mr. Bush and his wife have paid a higher tax rate than many fellow millionaires because most of his earnings come in the form of wages and salaries, instead of investment income, which is often taxed at a lower rate.
“One thing is obvious,” said Alan Viard, a resident scholar at the right-leaning American Enterprise Institute and a former staff economist in Congress, who took a cursory look at the returns. “Compared to many people in his income range, Jeb Bush clearly has less capital gains income, and therefore has a higher effective individual income tax rate.”
For several years, Mr. Bush, 62, has used an office at the Biltmore Hotel in Coral Gables, Fla., working closely with his son, Jeb Jr., while consulting, giving speeches and managing a private investment business.
One of his endeavors included serving as a paid director to the hospital company Tenet Healthcare, which backed President Obama’s Affordable Care Act. The position invited questions for Mr. Bush, who as a candidate opposes the health care law.
Mr. Bush profited handsomely from his Tenet shares. According to the newly released tax returns, Mr. Bush acquired $441,203 worth of stock in Tenet Healthcare in May 2011. The stock doubled in value by the time he sold it in October 2013, earning him a profit of $462,013 in just 29 months.
Like other hospital stocks, Tenet rose sharply from October 2012 through March 2013, when President Obama’s re-election made it likely that the health care law would be carried out. The law was considered a boon for hospitals because it was expected to increase business and reduce the expense of caring for uninsured patients who could not pay their bills.
Mr. Bush resigned from the Tenet board in 2014 when he was preparing for his presidential campaign, and this year sold off his stakes in his two remaining businesses as he contemplated a run for the presidency. He sold his consultancy, Jeb Bush & Associates, to his son and business partner, Jeb Jr., while also shedding his interest in the Britton Hill entities, a group of private investment and advisory firms.
His other high-profile and controversial engagements have included working as a paid adviser to Lehman Brothers, an appointment that included seeking an investment in 2008 in the failing bank from Carlos Slim Helú, a Mexican billionaire. Mr. Bush also consulted for the building materials manufacturer InnoVida, which went bankrupt and whose founder pleaded guilty to fraud charges.
The tax forms also trace the period in the 1980s and 1990s when Mr. Bush, then a young entrepreneur, was building his own political base in South Florida. He told a reporter at the time, “I want to be very wealthy.”
The returns showed that his average adjusted gross income was about $400,000 over the 18 years before he became governor.
Josh Barro and Patricia Cohen contributed reporting, and Kitty Bennett contributed research.
Follow the New York Times Politics and Washington on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter."
frame of article is: other
###
